9 Wherefore, I do begin my work of history, beginning not in my own time but some time ago, when the brethren of Oug went even down unto the Land Southward to preach the gospel unto the people of the land. For, their works and words are important to us who remain in the land of Mentina and their story is told during the winter months when all the works of the heroes of the people are rehearsed in the hearing of the little ones. And, if their history is so important to us in our day, I see not why it should not be as important unto them of our posterity who may wish to do the things we do. 
10 Wherefore, I do begin my record with an abridgement of the works and writings of the mission of the brothers and sister of Oug unto the Nephites of the Land Southward. 
11 Now, Hagmeni, who was the grandfather of Oug, was a great preacher of the word of God and he did travel upon the face of the Land Northward rooting out the Gadiantons and teaching them the word of God and the Gospel of Peace. And he was also a mighty man and a man of great stature. Wherefore, when he discovered a nest of vipers, for so the Gadiantons were called by the people, he did begin to diligently teach them. And when he had taught them the Gospel of Christ, he did straitly command them to covenant with God to lay down their weapons and their cunning plans to destroy the people and the peace of the land, and to become adopted into the family of the Nem. And behold, many there were who were so convinced by the power of his teaching, as also the power of the Holy Ghost in him, that they did do as he commanded them and became covenant Nem through the ancient and sacred law whereby we may take to ourselves and to our families, even those who share no relationship with us. For, we do regard as truth the principle taught by all Nem that we are all relations, being of one family, one heart and one mind. 
12 But behold, there were here and there, viperous men and women who would not listen to the preacher, nay, nor to the Spirit of God in him and they would not make the covenant, but swore in their wrath to take from the Nem all that they possessed and enslave them. Unto these Hagmeni did offer battle and he did slay them with the might with which God had blessed him. 
13 For, Hagmeni was a mighty man and he had been commanded of God to search out the Gadiantons and destroy their evil works. And this conversion he proposed to accomplish either by the might of the Spirit of God or by the might of his own arm, he being supported by the hand of God. And behold, in all his mission, when he found those who would not make the covenant and he was forced by their wickedness and hatred to bring them battle, the Lord did support and sustain him to the extent that he had the victory over all unto whom he did raise the sword. And behold, so notable was his success that the rumor of him went out even so much that many of the Gadiantons did covenant and become adopted into the Nem simply because of the rumor of his coming nigh unto them. 
14 And the sons of Hagmeni were infected with this same spirit and zeal in preaching the word of God unto the Gadiantons, except that they did not often find the need to offer battle, for the Holy Ghost was with them even to the convincing of all people to seek Christ and His Way. And not the least of these great preachers was his son, Sanempet and he was also a prophet of God. 
15 And the sons of Sanempet and of Pah Hem were also mighty men and valiant, and they did also go forth to teach the word of God unto all the people. And they were San, the eldest, and after him came Shigath and Shimnet, who were twins. Then came the daughters of Sanempet and of Pah Hem, whose names were Hempapet, Himneth, and Pa Akim. And behold, in his old age Sanempet and Pah-Hem brought forth Oug, who was chosen to stay behind when his brethren were called to go down unto the more wicked part of the people of the Land Southward to preach the word of God unto them. 
16 And behold, it is the history of their mission unto the people of the Land Southward, yea, even unto the Nephites, their brethren, that I do dedicate this book. 


CHAPTER 2 
1 Now, the story of how the sons of Sanempet went down unto the people of the Land Southward is spoken of somewhat in Oug’s writings, and he does mention in his record that they departed out of Mentina and were heard from now and then for some time. And after the space of time, Oug did not hear word of them again, and this greatly troubled him. But behold, the Lord Jesus, did visit the prophet Oug and console him when He appeared to the people of Mentina. 
2 Now, when they began their journey into the Land Southward, they went not by sea but, going around the great canyons on the east side, they did proceed southward. And behold, they came to a great expanse of desert and rough country. This they knew to be the very southern borders of the Land Northward, and also they knew that, if they continued on this course, they would come into a land of desolation. Wherefore, they did turn more toward the east and continued in this wise for many days. And behold, they came into a place of dense forests and many rivers and exceedingly large lakes, wherefore, they knew that they would soon come unto the eastern sea. 
3 And this was their design, for they wished to come into the Land Southward upon the eastern side. Yea, this was their design because they knew that this side of the mountains which divided the Land Southward was in the main inhabited by the Lamanites. And, whereas the Lamanites were rumored to have not so completely accepted the Gadiantons in that time, they felt the safer by approaching the Nephites from the East Sea. 
4 And after many days travel they did come to the East Sea, which is a great gulf, surrounded on all sides except the east by land. And by and by they came to a city which was called by the people who dwelt in it, Tamahualip. Then did the missionaries pause their progress long enough to acquaint themselves with the people of that city. For, the people of the land were known to the Nem and they made trade with the cities and settlements of the Nem from time to time. And the Tamahu-Ah were known to be people who would not allow the Gadiantons to dwell in their midst. Wherefore, the missionaries paused their journey in that city for a season. 
5 Now, it was while they were in Tamahualip that they found men who would take them down the coast in ships. For, the Tamahu-Ah were fisher folk and made their living by catching fish, and they had many boats and ships for this purpose. Wherefore, the missionaries found transport for themselves along the sea coast and did go around the land called Desolation by that route. And they went up into two ships and embarked upon their journey on the waters of the gulf. 
6 Now, they did not go directly down to the Land Southward, for, the Tamahu-Ah had commerce to attend to as they made their way. Wherefore, their progress was slow, but they learned much about the places and the people of the Land Southward as their hosts made their way slowly upon the waters, stopping here and there to trade and to take up news from the south. 
7 And behold, they learned that in some of the cities of the Land Southward the Gadiantons had taken complete possession of all the cities and that the People of God were often misused and persecuted by them. And, even in those cities that were not completely controlled by them, their wickedness had infected most of the cities in that region. And they learned that the persecution was the worst in the Cities of Laman, Josh, Gad, and Kishkumen, which were all cities on the east side of the land of river Sidon, which bordered the Land of Zarahemla. 
8 Wherefore, when their hosts had brought them as far to the south as they desired to go, even to that point where the land bent again to the east and the gulf closed in again from the south, they took their journey once again upon land in order that they might travel up even to those cities which were known to be the nests and strong places of the Gadiantons. 
9 And when they had come ashore, the three missionaries counseled together. 
10 And San, who was the eldest of the sons of Sanempet , said unto them: 
11 I do not think it wise that we should all go together into these cities, but let us divide one from another and each go into different places to preach the word of God. I will go up into the land round about the City of Laman. Shigath, go you up to the two Cities of Josh and Gad, for they are very close one to another. Shimnet, go up unto the City of Kishkumen. And Himneth, you must go where the Spirit of God shall take you. Now, take care as you go and even when you have arrived in the cities, for, we are to understand that the people are very wicked and may strive against us. But be faithful and the Lord will go before us. 
12 And San laid his hands upon his brethren and his sister and blessed them in the name of Jesus. And when he had done this, they did go their separate ways, promising that they would be diligent in preaching the word of God to all the people. 
13 Now, San went straightway up to the City of Laman, which was up in the mountains. And he observed that the people came out of the city to harvest large nuts and to hunt the wild beasts that infested the jungle surrounding the city. And when the people saw him, standing by a pool of water, they were afraid somewhat because of his appearance. 
14 For behold, the people of Laman had taken the custom of dressing like the Lamanites. That is, they wore very little clothing at all but a loin cloth. Nevertheless, they did paint their bodies with many symbols and marks, so much so that their appearance was very bright and gaudy. 
15 But behold, it was the custom of the Nem to cover up the body with humble and modest attire when they went in the sight of other people. And this was in accordance with the teachings of the High Place. For, God did give to the first man and the first woman, clothing to wear, that they might more fully protect themselves from the sin of adultery and fornication and, in this way, they did remember to more fully observe to keep the law of chastity which they received by covenant in the temple. 
16 And this was the custom of the sons of Sanempet. Yea, and they were each of them Priest of the Temple of Mentina. Wherefore, they did observe to keep all the covenants they had made in the High Place, and also the laws they had received there. And, because of this, the people of the City of Laman were surprised at the appearance of San when they saw him bending down to drink from the pool. 
17 And the harvesters ran back into the city to tell what they had seen in the jungle. For, they believed they had seen an enemy or an apparition. And behold, they did return again with the guards of the gate of the city, and they did approach San with weapons of war. 
18 And San raised up his hands above his head and began to sing a song of praise and thanks unto God. And behold, this did so surprise the men and the guards that they did all stop in their hasty progress toward him to hear the song. 
19 And San did speak to them, saying: 
20 Why do you come out of the city and approach me with weapons of war? Is there war in this place? 
21 And the captain of the guard answered him: 
22 You are a stranger here. Tell us your name and your business. 
23 And San answered him, saying: 
24 Is there war then, that you come out of your strong city with weapons, even against a lone man? 
25 Whereupon, the captain responded: 
26 It is not your business to ask us questions. You are a stranger here. What is your name and your purpose? 
27 I am San , and I come from a place you know not of. I am a messenger. May a messenger not travel in these parts? I ask again, am I in danger of running upon a war. For as you can see, I am unarmed and cannot defend myself. 
28 And the captain put up the sword he had drawn and answered him: 
29 I do see that you carry no weapons such as my men and I do, and you do not look to be a man of war. Nevertheless, you are a man of great stature and you are attired in a strange, Nephitish manner. Therefore, I must assume that you are a servant of the judges of Zarahemla and mean to do us no harm. But behold, it is not our custom that messengers from Zarahemla should come among us by any other means than by the gate of the city and it is unusual that one should tarry outside the city in this manner. What do you mean by it? Is it that you have arranged to meet with someone secretly that you come such and tarry in the wild places? 
30 And San answered him: 
31 I do not come from Zarahemla, but from a city far in the Land Northward. My message is no secret, but not knowing the lay of the land, and that men came out from the city to harvest, I assumed that the whole region was safe. Ought I to worry about my safety in this region? 
32 And the captain answered him: 
33 It is not safe to tarry alone in these jungles, for they are full of ravenous beasts that can easily overpower a man unarmed. Come into the city with us and we will deliver you up to the Chief Judge. He will receive your message and decide what is to be done with you. 
34 Wherefore, San was taken into the city to be judged by the Chief Judge. 
35 And the Chief Judge of the City of Laman was a Nephite named Wayus. But behold, he was not a righteous man. For, he did puff himself up because of his knowledge of the law and also because of his much riches. Yea, he did live in a palace and had many servants. And it was also his custom to take those who became debtors unto him and make them his servants. But behold, they could never earn enough in his service to pay their debts. Wherefore, they became slaves unto him, even though slavery was not a thing looked well upon by the Nephites. 
36 And this Wayus had great store of fine cloth and of precious things of all kinds. And he did attire himself in robes most costly, with gold and with purple. 
37 And behold, when the people of the city sought to remove him from the judgment seat, he conspired to have their leaders slain or he did cause them to be imprisoned. And in this way he retained the judgment seat, for, all the people feared him exceedingly. 
38 And the guards brought him before Wayus as he sat upon the seat to be examined of him. And Wayus spoke to him harshly: 
39 What is this person that the guards of the gate have taken. Surely, he is not one of us, or he would not be traveling alone in this dangerous country. For, we who live here know of the many dangerous beasts that stalk the jungle round about and we never leave the safety of our city except in groups. Who is this stranger who comes up to our walls and our gates and challenges our authority. 
40 And San answered him, saying: 
41 I am San, son of Sanempet. The same is the High Priest of the City of Mentina in the Land Northward. Behold, I do not come stealthily into your land, nor do I approach your city secretly. But, it is as you say. I am a stranger to your country and know not your ways. Nor am I familiar with all the animals that lurk in your jungles. But behold, I am not afraid of man or beast, for the Lord is with me and He guides my path. 
42 And Wayus knew straightway that this was a holy man and a prophet come unto them and he knew to treat him carefully. Nevertheless, he also knew that to have a prophet in the city was chancy indeed. The more so because he had maintained his judgment seat by wicked means. 
43 And why does one led by the Lord see fit to travel so far from his home in order to visit our city. We have our priests and our teachers. We need no vagabond to come and teach us the ways of the Lord. 
44 And San answered him, saying: 
45 Behold, I do not question the Lord my God. When He bids me go, I go. When He bids me speak, I speak. It is unto this city that He has led me and the Spirit prompts me to open my mouth and cry repentance unto this people. 
46 And Wayus was angry with San. 
47 Be silent! You must know that you speak to the Chief Judge of the People of Laman. I have the power to put you to death, wherefore, I warn you, have a care to what you say. Do you come into our city crying repentance? Of what do we need to repent? Are we not Nephites? Do we not have the temple? And do we not have priests and teachers appointed to teach the scriptures unto us? 
48 Behold, you say that you are the son of a High Priest. Does that make you our High Priest? It does not. You say you come from a city far in the Land Northward. Does that make you one of us? It does not. Do not come here with your message of repentance. You do not even know what we are. How can you think to judge us? 
49 Now, Wayus spoke thus in order to excite the people against San. For, he saw in him a means whereby he might gain favor in the eyes of the people. But San was filled with the Holy Ghost and saw his thoughts. 
50 Do not think that your costly robes and your high seat can hide the intent of your heart, Wayus Chief Judge. For, I see your mind and your thoughts. There is darkness there, yea, there is a mark of darkness upon you that is visible even to the naked eye of him who is not blinded by the fear that you have caused to come over this people. 
51 Behold, you are proud and puffed up. You fill your belly while children suffer for want of food. You clothe yourself with fine clothing while there are naked in the streets of your city. Yea, and you maintain your position of power by wickedness and murder. You, who are the first citizen of this city, are an example of the depth to which a people may sink into sin and corruption. 
52 Behold, you have put a yoke of bondage upon the people and they cannot break free. Yea, in slavery do you support your own wickedness and all the city suffers because of it. 
53 Wherefore, I do cry repentance unto you and unto this city and all its inhabitants. Repent, Wayus! For the hour of the Lord is at hand and should you delay the day of your repentance any longer, the hour shall come upon you and there will be no time for you to make amends. 
54 And Wayus laughed San to scorn and caused that he should be cast into prison and that he should receive no food or water until he died from hunger and thirst. And this he did in the sight and hearing of all the people, and behold, the more part of the people applauded him for it. 
55 And San was cast into a prison and they chained him to a wall. And the guards of the prison taunted him day and night and cast food at his feet where he could not reach it. And they set water also at his feet, that he might see it but not reach it to quench his thirst. And behold, the climate was exceedingly hot and San did suffer much. 
56 But he did remain faithful to the commandment of the Lord. For, the Lord had visited him upon the Way and He did command him to go even unto the City of Laman and cry repentance unto the people. 
57 Wherefore, San raised up his voice unto the Lord in mighty prayer, saying: 
58 Oh Lord, I know that You did command me to go up even to this strange land and city to cry repentance unto the Nephites. And I have begun fulfilling Your commandment. But the people are stiff necked and puffed up in pride. Wherefore, preserve me upon the Way, to the confounding of the people of this city and take away from them their riches. For they do seek to take away my life by depriving me of food and drink. But I know that you can preserve my life. Wherefore, let me tarry upon the Way, that I need no food nor drink. But let your anger be kindled against Wayus, that the people might see Your fury and repent. 
59 And behold, the Lord did answer the prayer of San. For, while he languished in the prison, he did go upon the Way and behold, he did not require food nor drink for many days. And the guards were astonished that he did not perish, for the heat was extreme. 
60 But this is not all. Behold, the Lord did bring a curse upon the City of Laman and all its inhabitants. For, they trusted not their neighbors and esteemed them all to be thieves and robbers. Wherefore, each man and woman did hide up their precious things that their neighbor might not steal them from them. 
61 But behold, the Lord did curse so that when the people went again to their hiding place to count their gold, or when they sought again their precious violet to wear in the sight of their neighbors, behold, their precious and costly things were not to be found. 
62 And He did also cause that swarms of insects might infest the wilderness round about the city so that, when the inhabitants went out to collect the fruits and the food that the jungle produced, they found only the husks instead and there was no food to gather. 
63 Now, the people of City of Laman had grown accustomed to the food that was produced naturally in the wilderness round about the city, and they toiled not in the soil to produce their own. Wherefore, the swarms were a sore curse indeed. For, they were forced to send to other cities for food. But behold, because they had hidden up their precious things, they had not wherewith to pay for the food brought to them from their neighbors. And except for some relief that came to them from certain families in Zarahemla, their neighbors took their goods and turned around again. Yea, they turned their faces unto their own cities once again and departed leaving none of their goods for the relief of the suffering of the people of the City of Laman. 
64 Then the people began to remember the words of San, that he had cried repentance unto the chief of their judges. And they went unto Wayus, the Chief Judge, and they reprimanded him sorely, saying: 
65 Why have you brought upon us this curse from heaven? What have you done to bring down upon us the swarm? And behold, where are your riches and why do you appear now before us in the same attire we saw you in yesterday? And the day before? Is it because you too have hid up your precious things and now cannot find them? Behold, this is the curse that has befallen us because you did not treat honorably with the stranger in our land. 
66 And Wayus was dismayed at the rush of people to his seat and he did attempt to defend himself, saying: 
67 Why do you lay this burden at my feet? And why do you trouble the judgment seat with your own iniquities? 
68 And certain of the mob stepped forward and gave him answer, saying: 
69 It is you to whom this prophet has come. We heard his harsh words to you when you observed him from the judgment seat. Did he not reveal to all the depth of your wickedness? Or do you deny that he spoke the truth? 
70 And he delayed them, saying: 
71 But tell me, surely, what part of his parable belonged solely to me and what part is a more general transgression to be shared among all who are in this city? It is certain that he did recriminate against me for some of my deeds. But, tell me, which among you who secured his goods yesterday has found them again today? 
72 And they cried, saying: 
73 Nay, but we are all penniless today because of the curse laid upon us. 
74 And he answered them, saying: 
75 Then complain not to me because this man has stolen your goods with a curse. He cried not only against me, but against all the people of this city. 
76 And the people beat their fists and clamored loudly that the judgment seat be taken from Wayus and given unto another. But Wayus called forth the guard of the city to protect him from the riot. And when the people had calmed a little, he again spoke unto them, saying: 
77 What is it that you wish me to do? 
78 And they cried in one voice: 
79 Bring out the prophet and let him be heard by the people. Then we shall judge him, and you. 
80 Wherefore, Wayus called for the prisoner to be brought out to be heard by all the people and judged. And when San was brought out, the people set a post at the center of the city and bound him to it. And they beat him, and spit on him, and reviled him, and accused him of theft. 
81 And after he had been thus scourged by the people, he was brought again before the judgment seat to be examined by the judge and his officers. And behold, San stood without aid before the judgment seat of the City of Laman, so much was he strengthened by the Lord. 
82 And Wayus questioned him again, saying: 
83 Behold, the people say that you have brought down upon us the judgments of God. What do you say to this, stranger? 
84 And San responded, saying: 
85 The people speak of what they know. 
86 And Wayus questioned him: 
87 What is it that you find so wicked in the way of our people? Come, you are a teacher. Teach me. 
88 And San spoke boldly, saying: 
89 Behold, when the beggar casts up his petition unto you, do you impart unto him of your own goods? Do you give him bread and wine of your own larder because he is hungry and because he is athirst? And do you give unto him your own cloak because he is naked? And do you pray for him and administer unto him because he is sick with the fever? Do you set him in your storehouse for the night because he is alone and penniless and full of sorrows. And then in the morning, do you find him lodging? Are these the things you do unto your neighbor who is in need? 
90 And the people round about the judgment seat laughed him to scorn. 
91 Still, he continued, saying: 
92 Nay, you do not these things unto him that is needy. Instead, you give him bread to eat and wine to drink for a price. And, if he have not any coin, yet you give him what he needs for a price. And when he eat and drink but cannot pay, you demand the value of the provender. And behold, when he cannot produce the money, you cast him into slavery for the price of bread and wine. 
93 Behold, the Lord has shown me your customs. It is because of your wickedness that the Lord has commanded me to come into this city and preach repentance unto the inhabitants of it. Yea, it is because of the great wickedness of the City of Laman, that I do prophesy against you. 
94 And behold, Wayus knew that San spoke the truth, yea, and all the people also knew, but they laughed at him, saying: 
95 This man is jealous of us. He is not accustomed to the prosperity that we have because he comes from a country where such things are not known. Behold, his forefathers departed out of the Land Southward and took their posterity into wilderness places and now, seeing our blessed state, he is offended. 
96 And Wayus took courage again, seeing that the people of the city were of a like mind as his own. And he stood up at the judgment seat and spoke to the people, saying: 
97 Nay, let us not be so hasty in judging this man. If it be true that he has not known of such wealth and prosperity as is ours, then we might understand how he might be offended. Let us release him, that he might come to know our people and accustom himself to life as it is in the civilized world. For, it does appear to me that he desires to live among the Nephites in this part of the land. Wherefore, if that be his desire, he will need to become accustomed to things among the Nephites. For, is it not so that he will find things very much the same wherever he wanders in these lands? 
98 And the people agreed and cried out for his release. Now, Wayus did this, not out of kindness or charity, but because he believed that San had brought down upon the city the judgments of God and he bethought him of how he might rid his City of this prophet. For, he knew that the people loved their riches, even as he did, and if this prophet walked among the more part of the people preaching against them as he had against him, then they would clamor for his death and the onus would not fall upon him. 
99 Wherefore, he did cause the guards to release San and he did apologize largely for the manner in which he had been treated, saying: 
100 Behold, we are unused to prophets in our city. For, our priests and teachers serve us well. Wherefore, walk now safely among the people and observe them. I do not ask you to hold your tongue, for you are a prophet and such things as the Spirit might give you utterance can only be for the good of this great city. 
101 And San left the judgment seat knowing the artifice of Wayus, but also rejoicing and praising God for his deliverance from bondage. And, as he left the judgment seat, behold, a small group of righteous men and women came to him and entreated him to follow them to that part of the city where they made their homes. For, they were afraid of what the people might do to him. Yea, they entreated him, saying: 
102 Come now with us, San, even down toward the river side of the city. For that is where we make our abode. And there are those among our neighbors who will hear your words and succor you. Whereas, in the part of the city in which you now stand, there are none who will do anything for you. 
103 And San went with them down to their homes, which were on the river side of the city, even down away from the rich and spacious houses and buildings which occupied the more wealthy sector. 


CHAPTER 3 
1 Now, that part of the city where the more humble dwelt was not filled with large and spacious homes and buildings. But behold, neither was that part of the city a place of squalor or poverty. Even the humblest of homes was well kept and the surroundings were pleasing. 
2 And one of the men who had entreated him to come down with him to the humbler part of the city was called Nephihet, and he took him unto his own home. And behold, he bid him sit in his own chair, and when he was sat, he did kneel down and wash his feet and anoint them. And he did also anoint his head with healing oil and gave him mild food and drink to his comfort. 
3 And Nephihet did also place a robe upon his shoulders and, when he was comforted in all the ways in which a healer might comfort his charge, he bid him take lodging in his own home with his family. 
4 And this charity did give heart unto San and he blessed them, saying: 
5 In all the city, there is none like unto Nephihet and his family. Surely, the Lord will bless you in all that you do. And he took each member of the family and laid hands on them and blessed them. 
6 And when San had taken his rest and had arisen again refreshed, Nephihet took him to where the people of that quarter of the city met together at the end of the day. And the people did wait upon him, and begged him to speak. 
7 Now behold, the number of them was exceedingly few. Yea, there were but twenty two families that gathered out of the whole of the city to hear the words of San. But he was not discouraged and began to speak unto them, saying: 
8 Behold, the things that Wayus said about me are in great measure true. I have come unto you from the Land Northward. Yea, and it is true that my forefathers left this land to travel into unknown places. And they did live in the wilderness for a generation and had not benefit of riches or precious things of any kind. 
9 But, you would think from the speech of Wayus, that such things have rendered them poor and desolate and that their descendents have grown into savages. But I say unto you that the words of Wayus are not true, for my people have continued to serve the Lord in all things and in all places, and their knowledge of Him has become great. Yea, the Nem, for so we call ourselves now, have become a great people and the Lord is with us. 
10 And behold, riches we have in plenty, but we have them in common one with another. For, all people receive of the abundance which the Lord has provided. Is it so here? I ask you, is it so among the people of this great city? 
11 And, with downcast eyes, the people bowed their heads and said; No. 
12 Why then, does Wayus rejoice in this great difference between our peoples? It is because he has set his heart upon the riches and the getting of them. Yea, his heart is so set upon these things that he casts off his duty to provide for the comfort and safety of the people of his city. This is wickedness and will cause the downfall of all that you know. 
13 And behold, this saying did disturb some of the people who had gathered to listen to the voice of this prophet from a far country, and some did take up their couch and their families and they did depart from before San. But, unto some, the words he spoke were the words of their hearts and they did continue to listen and to hearken unto him. And he did continue speaking unto them: 
14 Behold, whenever people gather together to save themselves from the dangers and perils of the world, belief in the Christ who is to come must form the foundation and purpose for their gathering. For, any man may build a house and hedge it round about. And that place of refuge is as safe from the perils of the wild world as are the walls of this city. And behold, he may set his sons to guard it day and night, and it is as safe as this great city. 
15 But, the day comes when the earth shall reel to and fro. Yea, there comes a day when, should a man find himself upon the road, he will not see his way and the earth shall rise up under his feet and cast him down. In that day, shall these walls save him? Yea, a day comes when, should a woman find herself at the well, she will not see her way and the earth rising up shall cast her down. In that day, shall these walls save her? And when all creation shall shake with a fury, and this great city is burned with a fire come down out of heaven, shall the man and the woman be preserved? It is a question. 
16 Shall a man and a woman heap to themselves riches and costly things to hedge up the wilderness? And with such a hedge, shall they think to bring safety unto themselves and their children? I ask you, does their rich and costly things protect them from any risk or peril? In the day of tribulation, what shall their riches buy them? When the earth has thrown down the crop, shall they buy meal? When the fire has burned the city, shall they buy shelter? I say unto you, Nay. For the day of their salvation is at hand. 
17 And shall a man abuse his neighbor, and make a slave of him, and beat him, and cast him into a prison, and feel secure in his standing? Or shall he by usury make his neighbor his slave, and the day of tribulation coming, still ask of him his succor? Shall a man heap up houses to let and oxen to hire and, setting a yoke upon his neighbor, expect them to come to his aid in the midst of his adversity? Is it possible that adversity should come to him alone? And shall he believe that any that he has abused shall not also suffer the tribulation, and yet feel some loyalty and charity toward him? It shall not be. 
18 Or behold, shall he heap up a storehouse of grain against the day of tribulation, but abuse his neighbor and make a slave of him? Shall not his neighbor assail his storehouse in the day of tribulation? And let him set all his sturdy men against the doors, shall the doors stand against the whole city? It shall not be. 
19 For, I say unto you all, The days that come shall test all people in this land, be they rich or poor, be they mighty or meek. Let every one of you lay up in store those riches that shall account unto you for righteousness. For, in the day of tribulation, all people shall seek for the wise to guide them. And, if the wise be despised of you, wherein shall they guide. And if wisdom has become despised, all is foolishness. Let him lead you then and guide you who will, but you shall not escape. 
20 Then the people cried out unto San that he should preach unto them all that would befall them and their city, and he did continue to preach unto them, saying: 
21 Behold, far away in the Land Northward from whence I am come unto you, we have built up the waste places and even a great city. We call this city, Mentina, or as it is called by many, Meninta. And this, in the tongue of the Ammonites who live among you, is “a place of salt.” Behold, this place has become the savor of the earth, for we live in peace, feasting upon all that the Lord does bestow upon us from heaven, having all things in common. And there are no poor among us, for we succor all, both great and small. In this do we call ourselves blessed, for in Mentina, there is no man or woman who causes suffering knowingly. 
22 For, we do seek the guidance and wisdom of they whom the Lord does call to be our governors. And we also do seek the wisdom of the old and halt. And we do seek the wisdom of our Peli. And we do seek the wisdom of our learned ones. And behold, we do diligently work for the good of all people and all people work to sustain and support each other. 
23 Behold, I spring from a line of teachers and healers who offer their services not for hire, though the laborer is worthy of it, but they do their work freely and beg of no one. For, in Mentina, the baker is free with his bread and the fisher is free with his fish. And behold, when there is corn, there is corn for all and none puts up his petition unanswered in the City of Mentina. And because of this, there are none who may claim poverty, for all receive of their wants freely. And, when the city puts up its stores, it is for all people that the storehouse is filled. Yea, even the stranger in our streets is as welcome to the abundance of the Lord as the citizen. 
24 And the people asked him: 
25 Does no man own his field then? And shall all men tread the winepress together? And he answered them, saying: 
26 Nay, but person, be they man or woman, has the stewardship of their own land, or shop, or press, or ship, and does work by the sweat of their face. But behold, they do offer up the fruit of their labor over that which is necessary for their own living. And, if a man make shoes, he does put shoes on his family, that they be not naked. But the increase of his labor he does give freely to his neighbor, that he be not naked. And if a man go to catch fish in the lake, he dries the fish and pounds it, and that which is necessary for his own family he keeps back, that they be not hungry. But behold, the increase of his labor he does give freely to his neighbor, that he be not hungry. 
27 And behold, there are days of tribulation and adversity. But, when the day of tribulation comes, do you think the people assail the storehouse to take from it all that they need? I say unto you, It is not so. For all receive freely and there is no violence. For again, there is no hedge raised up and no strong men guarding the gate. Behold, all receive of the abundance of the city equally and, in the day of violence, there is none who must resort to violence. 
28 And behold, this is not all. For, all men and women go up to the High Place together. Yea, the temple of the Lord is open to all who would hear His voice and seek His face. Is it so in this great city? I know not. But, I say unto you, Even the sojourner in the land is taken up to the High Place, if he wish it, to seek the Lord there and there is no hedge upon it. 
29 And all men and women raise up their thanks unto God both day and night. And they do also meet often to celebrate His coming together. And in their synagogues they do teach the peaceable things of God with joy, with meekness, but also with celebrations. Yea, in spiritual things also they do have all things in common and none is prevented. 
30 And these things which San spoke troubled the people, for they knew that such was not the way of their city, nor of their people. For, they had not anything in common and, if a man lacked, he had to buy that which he needed. And, if he had not wherewith to buy, then was he made a slave because of his lack. 
31 And also they knew that their synagogues were divided among the rich and the poor. And only the rich met in prayer with the rich. The poor did meet in lowly circumstances with the poor, as was the tradition of the city. And behold, when a prophet or teacher came among them from the City of Zarahemla, they were taken in by the rich and entertained in their synagogues. The poor did wait upon the rich to hear the words of such teachers, but were never welcome to hear his words themselves. Such was the state of things in the City of Laman. 
32 And San, seeing that the words which he had spoken touched the souls of the hearer, he did speak the more plainly unto them. For, he perceived that they did hunger for the word of the Lord, and they did thirst for that water which fills the soul. Wherefore, he did preach unto them the Gospel of Peace, saying: 
33 Behold, I perceive that you do seek after righteousness. Therefore, I shall open my mouth to you and teach you that which the Spirit does dictate to my mind. 
34 Seek no more to satisfy men, but satisfy God. Seek no more the counsel of the wise in this city, but seek the wisdom that proceeds from the mouth of God. Seek no more to please them who rule over you, but seek to please your God. Seek the face of God, for He is mighty to save. 
35 Lay no more up stores against the day of your tribulation, for, that day is come upon you, and greater tribulation is to come. Rather, give of your substance to the beggar and raise him up. For, I say unto you, The aid of the beggar shall be the greater value for you when all the earth is in tribulation. Yea, work with your might to provide for yourselves, but give of your increase unto all that lift up a petition unto you. For, surely they shall support and sustain you also when you are all beggars upon the road. 
36 Pray always unto the Lord, who is the Son of God, even that Creator who give abundantly unto all living. Lift up your heads and cast your eyes upon the face of Him who is mighty to save. Bow not your heads down unto that man who shall be as much a beggar as you in the day of his tribulation, but lift up your eyes and your voice unto that God who shall come to save you all. 
37 Meet often in your meager synagogues and give thanks unto God that you sit upon the floor without mats and not upon a couch in a place elevated above the congregation. Sing praises and thanks unto God and not unto your officials. Make priests unto yourselves who are humble as you and set no wealthy man above you to sing for you until all are equally wealthy. Make teachers unto yourselves who are humble and who seek the face of Christ who shall come. For, the Spirit shall give such teachers their voices and they shall teach you of the peaceable things of the kingdom. 
38 Make no man or woman an offender because of their words. For, as the world is large and spacious, so therefore, is there much space and many peoples. Because their belief and their words may be different, this does not signify that their words are not the words of Christ. But give ear unto their words and subject them unto the Holy Ghost, who shall testify unto you of truth. Yea, you need not worry that any shall deceive you, if you have the Holy Ghost as your companion, both old and young, both great and small, for it is He who makes a surety of those things which are true. Yea, He does make a surety and a certainty, even to the testifying of truth unto your minds and your hearts. Wherefore, none can assail His storehouse, and you shall have riches laid up in store, even riches in heaven. 
39 And, from this time forth, make all your comings and your goings in the name of the Lord. Yea, pray in His name unto the Father. Yea, call upon the Father in the name of the Son. For, His atonement is unto you as a mighty bulwark and a ward and citadel. Yea, bless all things in His name. Baptize in His name. Wash yourselves in His name and cloth yourselves in His name. Raise up your voices each day in a joyous way in His name, for He does hear the prayers of the righteous and answers them. 
40 And, when the Spirit of Prophecy comes upon anyone among you, despise it not, for it is a gift given of the Holy Ghost, but send that one forth to preach in the city. Support the prophet with your own substance and withhold not, for, howbeit a whole city might be saved. But if you withhold your substance, the words of the prophet might be dulled by hunger or thirst, or the necessities of life. Wherefore, make not beggars of your prophets , but lift up the hands that hang down. 
41 Do always the words of Christ. Let not any petition rise up from any widow, but care for them in all judgment. Yea, let not any cause occasion the widow’s petition, but anticipating their want, care for them in Christ’s name. 
42 And likewise, let not the fatherless go abroad in the streets to gain a living for their distressed mother and for their brothers and sisters. Nay, for this is wickedness. Let the fatherless be cared for with all judgment and not by commandment, but freely without extortion. For behold, he who makes a slave of the weak shall be destroyed by the weak in the day of their tribulation. 
43 And, if there be any among you who is sick, let them also be cared for tenderly. And call upon them who have the Gifts of the Spirit to heal them. Yea, call upon all they who have great faith to lay hands upon them and to pray for them who are prostrate, that they may be healed. 
44 Now, you mothers and fathers, teach your children diligently to follow the Lord and not after the things of the world. And this is a difficult task I lay upon you. For, in this city, all men teach the tender to seek after riches and to lay up riches against some futurity. But this is wickedness and the Lord shall not support such a teaching. Behold, it is hard to live in a city and among people who shall daily teach your children to seek after the world, but you must do it, or all is lost. 
45 In short, love one another. Be as family one to another. For, what father, seeing his son hungering, shall withhold his provender that his son die? And what mother, seeing her daughter is naked, shall withhold her own raiment? And shall a brother or sister remain without the house upon the street? Nay, but they are rushed inside with much rejoicing. Yea, you shall give shelter within your own house. You shall clothe the naked and feed the hungry, for, this is the Gospel of Peace and anything else comes of wickedness. 
46 And, if the wise of your city do smirk, yea, if they shall wink at you and wag the finger, let them be. For they receive their reward daily. But, in the day of their tribulation, when all things are in commotion, and the hungry do assail their storehouse, who shall wink then? 
47 Even let there be they who are considered unworthy knock upon your door, shall you turn them back into the street? I say unto you, Nay. But you shall feed them, clothe them and send them on with money in their purse. For, who may judge the heart of any man but that God who created him? And who may take the full measure of any creature but the Creator thereof? Do not think to take up that mantle, for it is Christ’s and He employs no servant there. 
48 And all these things ought you to do, who seek the face of the Lord. For, if perchance you do find Him, and you have not followed His precepts, how shall you address Him? Oh Lord, King of Heaven and Earth! We know that You are holy and that You have created all things. Yea, we know that the winds and the earth obey Your command and rejoice in the full measure of their creation. But, behold Lord, we have not sought Your face nor followed Your precepts. But we are Yours nonetheless, wherefore, let us enter into Your presence. 
49 Behold, I say unto you, If you have not been His friend in the day of your probation, He will not acknowledge you in the day of His glory. Yea, if you have failed to call upon Him, He shall not acknowledge your greeting when all the earth is finished. Seek Him diligently, even in the hour of your adversity and He will comfort you in tribulation. 


CHAPTER 4 
1 And many who listened to the teachings of San were overcome with joy. For, they had sought the face of the Lord and now this prophet had come among them to confirm the things they knew to be true. And they did rejoice in his words and sought him all the more to teach them. 
2 But there were some who were ashamed because of his words. For they knew that they had not walked uprightly before the Lord and they did still covet the riches and the comforts of the rich. And there were others who wished to use San’s words to overthrow the Chief Judge and Governor of the City so that they might rule in his stead. Now, these men took an accounting of the teaching of San unto Wayus, but they did turn his words against him, saying: 
3 Behold, most noble Judge and Governor over all this people, we know that you are worthy to be our ruler and that you have ruled in righteousness. Wherefore, your judgment is righteous always. Judge now this man for us and rid us of his teachings. 
4 And Wayus inquired of them, saying: 
5 What is it that this man has taught that has so offended you that you should come entreating me to rid you of him and his words? And they answered him, saying: 
6 Behold, he teaches all to seek not after the righteous judgments of our governor, but to follow ones own conscience and the dictates of ones own heart. This thing is hurtful to our young people. For behold, they think they may live in this great city and yet believe that they need not obey your laws. We desire that all our youths learn the ways, customs and laws of our people and hope to have peace in our city because of them. But behold, this teacher does exhort them to seek not after them. Wherefore, we do ask you to rid us of this prophet. 
7 And Wayus, seeing his opportunity, did send his mighty men to take San, but he was forewarned in a dream and went out of the city before the Judge had ordered his men. Wherefore, he was not to be found among the poor of the city, for he had escaped the judgment of the unrighteous. 
8 And Wayus was angry that he was unable to lay his hands on San and also with the poor who had sheltered him and listened to him. Wherefore, he ordered that all the poor, or rather all they who had not riches and precious things, should be removed from the city and cast out. And this he caused to be done with great violence, and many people were killed. And all they who survived the cleansing, or so they called it, of the City of Laman, hid themselves as best they could in the wilderness, and many took their flight even into other cities round about. 
9 And behold, San did stand himself once again by the gate and did prophesy against the city, saying: 
10 Behold, I do curse the City of Laman and all its inhabitants. For, you have cast out the prophets from your midst and this you have done with the shedding of blood. Wherefore, I do curse all the inhabitants of this wicked city with a curse. And this shall be the extent of the curse – in the hour that the Lord, Jesus Christ, does make his appearance unto this people, even as has been promised by the holy prophets, the City of Laman and all its inhabitants shall be burned by fire, and none shall survive the day. 
11 Yea, you shall shut your gates and think yourselves safe behind your battlements. But behold, fire of the Lord shall descend from the heavens and it shall consume you all. And behold, even the rocks shall not abide the heat of His wrath and all shall be overturned. And behold, this place shall be a hiss and a by word, and even the beasts of the wilderness shall avoid it. 
12 Now, when the guards of the gate heard him speak thus, they sought to lay hands on him, that they might deliver him up to Wayus to be judged for the hard words he had spoken against the city. But behold, in the moment that they were about to lay their hands on him, they were confounded, for they found him not, and he was taken away by the Spirit to another place. 
13 And San continued to teach those few who had escaped the city. And behold, each day he remained with them in the wilderness round about the City of Laman, more people did begin to come out of the city to find refuge with the outcasts. And, within a short space of time, they became a great people in the wilderness, so many were the people who repaired unto them from the City of Laman, and also from other cities. And they did begin to build a settlement a day’s journey from the city. 
14 For, the rule of Wayus become very strait. Yea, Wayus the Chief Judge of the city did tremble in fear of the words of San. For, both the prophecy which he spoke at the gate against his people, but also the things he spoke when he taught the people did fill Wayus exceedingly, for he could not escape them. 
15 And behold, Wayus sent a party of armed men out of the city to seek out this settlement and to put the inhabitants of it to the sword. And to justify this, he did accuse them of treasonous and blasphemous teachings. And the men did search for the space of many days to find the outcasts. And behold, they did find them and the settlement that they had made in the wilderness and they did make their plans to attack the settlement by night. 
16 But San was warned of their plan and he sent all of the people out of the settlement. Now, when the men of Wayus came into the settlement, they found it empty and they also found evidence that all the people had departed out of it. Wherefore, they believed that there must have been a spy or informant among them and the captain of the party, whose name was Menem, did begin to examine each man. 
17 And behold, not finding any man that could have informed the outcasts of the City of their impending doom at the hands of the armed men, but also knowing that Wayus would not be satisfied with his report, Menem did accuse one of his men of treason and he, with his own sword, took the man’s life in the sight of all his men. 
18 Now, this did cause his men to distrust and even to hate Menem. And, when he ordered his men to turn again and return unto the City of Laman, with the excuse that there had been a traitor who warned the outcasts and allowed them to escape into the wilderness, behold, half of the men were determined to slay him. Wherefore, they did attack and slay their captain. But half the men agreed not with the rebels and they did take up their swords and did battle with them after that they had slain Menem. 
19 And behold, the two sides did fight each other until there was not one man left of them. But their bodies lay strewn in the streets of the settlement and the wild animals of the wilderness came in and devoured them. 
20 And, when the outcasts of Laman returned to their settlement, they saw the carnage and would not go again into their homes, and they abandoned their settlement and fled out of the land, even unto distant cities. 
21 And thus ended the mission of San unto the inhabitants of the City of Laman. And behold, we know that the City of Laman was verily burned at the Lord’s coming. For, it is written in another place and we need not doubt the truth of it. 


CHAPTER 5 
1 Now behold, San, when all the outcasts of the City of Laman were fled, he was ushered by the Spirit to the place where his sister, Himneth, was laboring. And it was in the City of Josh that Himneth was laboring to teach the Gospel of Peace. 
2 And she did rejoice exceedingly when she did see him in the streets of Josh. For, the people of Josh were even more puffed up in pride than were the people of Laman and they had rejected her words. But behold, because she was but a woman, they had paid no heed to her preaching and did abuse her daily. And her situation was dire indeed, for the people of Josh did withhold food and drink from her, and she did wander the streets alone. 
3 But, when she saw her brother preaching in the streets of Josh, she knew that her Lord had saved her. But behold, San did not readily recognize his sister, for she had been abused and beaten, and also she was much wasted by the want of food. And when she came close to him, he saw her face clearly and knew that she was his own relation and his heart poured out to her because of her dire condition. 
4 And behold, his anger was also kindled against the people of Josh and he addressed them in his wrath, saying: 
5 Oh, you people of Josh, hear these my words which I shall speak unto you. The Lord God is not pleased with any who would abuse his daughters. Yea, gather round, you mighty ones of Josh, for this day I shall speak the word of the Lord unto you. For, His wrath is kindled against this city and this day you shall surely hear of it. 
6 And there was in the street passing by, one of the lesser judges of the city and he did hear San and answered him, saying: 
7 Belay your wrath, stranger. For, what can this wretch be to you? Behold, she is but a lunatic come from northern climes and has been many weeks prophesying against this good city and its people. And what can it be to you, who I see by your bearing and your attire are obviously a man of wisdom and of substance, that she has been thus handled roughly by they whom she has handled with so little respect? 
8 And San looked upon the man and was for a moment unable to respond, for his was very hot in his anger toward the people of the city. 
9 And the name of the lesser judge who addressed San was Ohmer. And this same Ohmer spoke again, directing his words unto San but also unto the multitude that had begun to gather around them. Yea, he spoke as if to San, but in reality he made his speech to please the people that had gathered, saying: 
10 Behold, we all know of this woman, Himneth. Did she not come boldly into our city and inquire of us about our ways and our customs? And, finding them not to her liking, is this not the woman who began to preach to us and to impose her ways upon us? 
11 Yea, she did extol the virtues of her people and condemned the way we choose to live. What is it to her that we are rich with the blessings that the Lord has seen fit to bestow upon us? Can it be anything but wickedness that has caused her people to become a vagabond race? Yea, one can easily make out her jealousy, and can this be anything but the type and image of all her people? That being as it is, why should anyone in this great city give heed to anything she has to say? 
12 And behold, being so rabid in her condemnation of our ways and customs, which all people know to be good and true, how can anyone judge us for treating her as she really is, a lunatic? Or is it to be expected that thinking people take a mad dog into their homes? 
13 And after this wise did Ohmer speak of the sister of San. And he was inflamed with wrath. But behold, his sister did take him by the hand and led him away from the multitude, and she calmed him, saying: 
14 Behold, it is with a glad heart that I greet you, my brother. Let us away from these people, that you may inform me of all that has happened with you. Yea, let us away, that these may be appeased and you and I may find a place to speak. 
15 But San was not calmed by the words of Himneth and he approached the multitude and addressed them, saying: 
16 What is the hospitality of this city, that would treat a traveler so? Have I been in Josh but five minutes and I have seen the charity of her people? I say unto you, Nay. But I have seen some of her character. And should I extol your virtues, who would treat a woman thus? And let us assume that she is mad, do you so to all the afflicted of your city? And how does any who suffers fare at your hands? Speak! I would know your answer! 
17 And Ohmer answered him, saying: 
18 What would you have us do to the woman, being mad? Are you also from her country, that you would compel us also to your ways and thinking? 
19 And San answered, saying: 
20 Of a surety no! For, I would get away with my life. It appears to me that anyone from a foreign land might fare no better here than this poor woman. Whose is she? Who is her father and her mother that she should be so treated? Is she the daughter of some enemy to be beaten and abused? Is she the chattel of an enemy that she, because of her parentage, must be so abased? 
21 And Ohmer replied, saying: 
22 Nay, I know nothing of her parentage. She has brought all upon her as you see now simply by her own doing. Her state is none of these good people. She came in unto us and abused herself upon us. Wherefore, my good man, make no mistake, we have given her as good as she gave. 
23 And San spake to him, saying: 
24 Whom then has she beaten? Whom has she mistreated and abused? Unto whom has she withheld food and water? And whose child has she had her way with? I perceive from your faces that she has not received of you that which she has given, for, how could it have been in her power to do you damage such as you have done unto her? 
25 Behold, I know your hearts and your minds. Is it to be believed that such evil can exist in the heart of any Nephite? What is this that you have done? Is this the law of your city? If so, show me where it is written. 
26 Now, to this the people had no answer, for they had caught themselves in a snare of their own making. Surely, they heaped ridicule and onus upon the unknown woman, and this was easily done. Yea, the people looked on while all that was evil was done unto the strange woman prophetess. Wherefore, when one who spoke with strength and with the Spirit indicted them, they knew their own guilt and were ashamed. 
27 But behold, they were ashamed not because they had done evil, but because they had been found out and exposed. Wherefore, they were inflamed in their hearts and Ohmer stood forward again as the mouth of the people and he accused San, saying: 
28 You are also of this sort! Wherefore, behold, we will treat you as suits our custom. 
29 And Ohmer strode forward that he might strike San with his staff. But behold, San was filled with the Holy Ghost and rebuked him, saying: 
30 Touch me not! For I am filled with the Holy Ghost. Wherefore, I give you fair warning, if you stretch forth your hand to touch me, you shall surely be stricken down to the earth! 
31 And Ohmer was filled with fear and retreated behind the growing multitude. And he incited the multitude with many words, saying that this man ought to be taken by force and made to answer for his words before the Chief Judge of the city. And the multitude did press forward to take him, but he rebuked them also, saying: 
32 In the name of Jesus Christ, my master, I command you. Touch me not! For, any who shall stretch forth the hand to do me injury, him shall the Lord strike in His mighty wrath! 
33 And behold, the multitude felt the power of the Spirit in San and they stayed themselves. 
34 Then did San open his mouth unto all the people and he did condemn them all, saying: 
35 Surely, there is none more wicked in all the world than the people of Josh! What could this woman have said that could justify what you have done unto her. And I declare before God that you have all done this unto her. 
36 Behold! She is beaten, ravished and left to starve in the streets, and who can declare unto me the cause? Will any of you rehearse to me the words so evil that she spoke unto you that would justify this cruelty? Or is it even possible that she could have so much evil to say? Is it possible that so evil a people exist who can cause such an unrighteous judgment come upon a noble woman! 
37 For, I declare unto you that this woman is of noble birth, even the daughter of a noble people. She is a prophetess among her own and speaks with the Spirit of God. There is not one soul in her own city that does not esteem her as among the very gems of the treasury. And who of you can claim the same? 
38 And the lesser judge Ohmer stood forth once again to defend his people, saying: 
39 We knew not of her birth or her status. Do you say that this woman comes of noble family? Does her father have some standing then, that we should esteem her as any more than you see here? 
40 And San answered him, saying: 
41 This one is the daughter of Sanempet, who is mighty in the eyes of not one city, but of a multitude of cities. Do you not know the name? He it was who subdued the Gadiantons in the Land Northward! 
42 Now, this saying frightened the people of Josh, and not least of all, Ohmer. For, they believed the raving woman to be of lowly birth and, therefore, felt free to treat her as a slave. But there was a law decreed in Josh which made the sons and daughters of the wealthy families immune from the statutes, and also that to touch such a one was a crime worthy of death. Wherefore, when they heard San say these things, many of the multitude did begin to disperse. But behold, San was not finished speaking unto the people and he continued, saying: 
43 What say you fathers of this great city? Would you that I inform that great Sanempet that you have dishonored his daughter so? Or do you not fear reprisal from one so great as he? Speak, fathers! Which of you will not mourn the loss of your fair sons, a fair recompense for what you have done to the daughter of the mighty? And which of you will not shriek to watch the same done unto your fair daughters as has been done upon this woman? 
44 And again Ohmer strode forth to calm the people and to speak in their defense, saying: 
45 Believe us when we say that we had no knowledge of who this woman was, nay, nor of her parentage. We knew only that she did cry against the good people of this city. Yea, and all will attest that she did condemn us all to destruction because of our customs. And I ask you, how are our customs to be so despised, being the same as all the great cities of this land? 
46 And San answered him, saying: 
47 What can be the ways and customs of this people that she could have had anything to say that did justify this that you see before you? 
48 And Ohmer answered, saying: 
49 Surely, she did find great occasion to condemn us for our great riches. Now, this ought not to be done, for it is only because the Lord does choose to bestow upon us His blessings that we have our riches. And how, then, shall this one come in unto us and cry repentance because we are worthy and the Lord does see fit to bless us? 
50 And San replied unto him, saying: 
51 If it so be that you are so prospered by 
the Lord, it must be because of great righteousness. Wherefore, I must ask again, what has she said that could bring upon her such a wicked retribution? For again, if the Lord has blessed you with riches, then it must be that you follow the admonition of the Lord – that you seek riches in order that you might with them do great good. But where is the good? 
52 Behold, I look to my left and to my right and I see great and spacious houses. Yea, and I look above me and I see the towers of the city. And I look at its denizens and I see costly apparel and jewelry. And this you say comes from the Lord and by His grace. But, why then, do I look down and see such treatment of this visitor to your city? I ask myself, how can this be? 
53 Has she stolen ought? 
54 And the people answered, Nay.
55 Then has she played the harlot? 
56 And the people answered, Nay. 
57 Has she conspired against the rule of this country and against its laws? 
58 And the people answered, Nay. 
59 Has she killed or committed some mayhem? 
60 And the people answered, Nay. 
61 It is a strange thing then. You say to me and expect me to accept, that you have done almost all that I have spoken against a woman merely because she spoke out against your custom. Are you all in like bondage? Is there no freedom to speak at all in your city? For, if this be the case, then I distrust that you have attained such wealth by the hand and heart of God. 
62 And Ohmer cried out because San began to disparage the people for their riches. 
63 You are of a surety one of her kind. Speak truth, is it not so? 
64 And San answered him, saying: 
65 I am her brother, and the son of that same Sanempet of whom I have spoken. Shall you treat me as you have her? Is this the law in your city? Shall I starve in your streets? Shall I be beaten and spit upon? Shall you have whatever way you wish with me in the sight of all men? I declare unto you, if your like were to be found anywhere in the Land Northward, you would be rooted out as the Gadiantons. None of you would escape. 
66 And with these words, behold, the multitude rushed in upon San to take away his life. But behold, he did stretch forth his hand and it was unto them as he had forewarned. For, all those who touched even the hem of his sleeve fell to the earth as if dead. And a cry and a tumult rose up from the multitude, but they did cease to attempt to take him, or to take away his life. Then did San stretch forth his hands and then did he lift up his voice unto the multitude: 
67 Behold, I speak to this whole city. Because you do set yourselves up as the judge of all people, and because you would see fit to treat any person as you have treated this prophetess, yea, and because you would condone it and even revel in it upon your own streets and in front of your own houses, I do cry against you. Repent and seek the face of Christ! For, should He come upon you in this wicked hour, there shall not stand one of you. 
68 Do you wonder at the wrath of a brother at the sight of this his sister? Think not that you have seen even the fraction of the wrath of the Lord! Surely, He does not stay His hand in blessing all they who believe on Him and delight in His name. Do not think because He delights in blessing His servants that He will stay His mighty hand in doing justice unto they who controvert His law. I do not think He will care about your ways and your customs, nay, nor will He give ear to one word of your justification when He looks upon this, His servant and all that you have done unto her. 
69 Did she condemn you for your riches? I know not, for I heard not her words. But I say unto you, I have no need of such intelligence to ascertain the extent of your wickedness! I have only to look upon the poor wretch upon whom you have cast your judgment. Behold, if this is justified in your sight, what else might a man do in this city? What is more, what else might a man do and claim justification from God for it? 
70 And, if I but praise you all for your worthiness, what wickedness would you justify in me? Yea, if I do as this man has done and praise you in your wicked and abominable state, would you raise me up to be one of your judges? And behold, if I praise you and extol your virtues, and even claim the grace of God in your behalf, as the men you have heaped up to be your rulers do, what horror will you allow me to do in the corners of your city? 
71 Behold, I will testify against you in all the land and, if word of you does not become a hiss out of the mouths of all your neighbors, then I will know that all the Land Southward has become as wicked as you. 
72 You wish us to leave this city, and behold, I shall grant your wish. Yea, I will take my sister and I will depart out of this city, but first you shall hear the word and will of the Lord Jesus Christ. 
73 Behold, when Jesus comes unto this land, as He promised the prophets that He would, there will be but few people left to greet Him. Yea, and of all the cities in this land, those whose citizens mistreat or cast out His servants shall be utterly destroyed by a great fire which He will cause to come down upon them from heaven. Many cities shall be swallowed up as the earth heaves to and fro and yet others will be cast down into the depths of the sea. But, they who reject the prophets when they are come in unto them will be utterly destroyed by fire. 
74 And I say unto you that the time of His appearance speedily comes and will be upon you quickly. You, who have cast out the prophets, repent and come again unto Christ. For, lest you do repent, your lot will be worse than any other city. Yea, your fathers and brothers will not return from their labors, but will be burned up in their shops and in their fields and you will not see them. And behold, your mothers and sisters will not depart from the house, but will be burned up at the basin or in the doorway. And your fine apparel will be consumed. And all your precious things will not stand before the flame. And your spacious houses and your towers will all be brought to the earth by the fire which will consume them. 
75 Can you escape the wrath of a just God when His anger is kindled against you? Do not believe it! Wherefore, repent and come again unto Him who is mighty to save. And behold, if you do this, then will the Lord preserve you. But, if you repent not, your lot shall be the same as all who have rejected the word and will of the Lord. 
76 Then did the multitude break up and disperse, for the people knew that this man was a prophet and that the rulers of the city, knowing of the preaching and the prophesying of San, would not stand long before ordering his death. Wherefore, they did begin to disperse quickly so that they should not be esteemed as being party to his words. 
77 But behold, the men who had approached San to shed his blood, began to stir. For, they were not killed by the power of the Spirit which was in San, but they were stricken down to the street, each one. But, as they arose from their stupor, some of them fled with fear from before the face of the prophet, while others knelt themselves before him and begged his forgiveness. For, while in their stricken state, they had been taken to a place where they were instructed by their grandfathers and, in that place, they came to an understanding of the error of their ways, and they did repent. Wherefore, they knelt themselves down to San and pledged themselves to protect him and his sister in whatever circumstances that might arise. 
78 But behold, San did take them by the hand and lifted them up, admonishing them to kneel before no one but their God. And he did speedily forgive them, for they were truly repentant, and he did accept their offer of service. 
79 And the number of them were seven. And the names of the seven who were stricken by the Spirit and who were taken upon the Way to be instructed were: Stephat, who was Captain of the Gate; and Nepham, his companion in arms; and Hemset, the tanner; and Korim, who begged on the street; and Joram, he who made weapons of all kinds; and Zeezret, his apprentice; and also Phez, who was one of the lesser judges of the city. These are the names of the men who sought to lay hold of San to take away his life, but repented and became the Lord’s disciples. 
80 And they did surround San and his sister and usher them out of the city. And when they were a day’s journey away from the City of Josh, Himneth, the prophetess, was too fatigued to go further. Wherefore, they did build a small shelter for her and they guarded her while she rested. 
81 And behold, San gathered herbs by the gift of the Spirit that was in him, and he foreknew by this gift which were good for healing and which were not, and he did administer unto her by his gift. Wherefore, he did prepare a drought of the plants he had gathered and the odor of it went up and refreshed even they who smelled of it. And he did take the drought unto his sister and did give it unto her to drink. And behold, he blessed the drought with sacred breath and he did pray over it. And, when he had asked for the presence of all the Heavenly Beings who might have anything to do with the healing of his sister and when she had drunk of the drought and rested, she was refreshed in her body and her spirit was strengthened. 
82 And behold, the seven companions once again entreated San to forgive them, for they felt keenly the effects of their sins and wished to be cleansed of them. And San taught them, saying: 
83 Behold, I am not powerful to save. If you wish the effects of your sins to be washed away, then you must make a new covenant with the Lord and you must betoken this new covenant with baptism. For, for this cause was this principle taught unto our fathers, and behold, I know that there are many who still teach this principle in the Land Southward. Wherefore, because you have repented of your sins, you ought to make a covenant to abandon them and never return unto them and seal the covenant with a token of your earnest desire to hold true to it all the days of your lives. If you will do this, then the Savior will wash away even the effects of your sins and you will be justified before Him. Then shall He make you His servants and you may do many mighty works in His name. Is this the desire of your hearts? 
84 And the seven companions answered in one voice that this was the desire of their hearts, but that, since they had been baptized in their youths, they knew not whether there was any other baptism that might save them from such awful wickedness. Whereupon, San answered them, saying: 
85 It is written: Though your sins be scarlet, they shall be white as snow. Whereunto were you baptized in your youths? 
86 And Stephat answered him, saying: 
87 When we were but youths, our priests baptized us so that we might become members of Christ’s church. This was the token of membership in His kingdom according to the ways and customs of our people. I, for one, left the path of righteousness many years ago and I know not where my companions stand. Notwithstanding, we have been taught that there is but one baptism and one church. Can we now be baptized again, and if so, unto what church shall we be baptized, seeing that we have dedicated ourselves unto Christ? 
88 And San was pleased at this saying and answered Stephat, saying: 
89 Of a certainty, there is but one kingdom of God, but of churches there are many. For the churches are formed by men with a purpose to serve God and in this they do great good. And some believe one way while others believe another. But, if you wish to become pure and clean before Christ, you must make your covenant not with any church, but with Christ Himself. Wherefore, let me tell you of the custom of my people, for I believe it will help you to understand how you may become doers of the word and not hearers only. 
90 The Nem of Mentina, when they learn a great thing, or when they make a great commitment, they do go up to their holy men and women and ask them to baptize them again. And this is done not as token of membership in any church, but as token of the gratitude they feel because of the great thing that the Spirit has taught them, or in token of the new covenant they are willing to make with the Lord. This is not done but once and for all, but many times throughout the life of the believer. In this way do the Nem renew their covenants and their commitments unto the Lord their God. In this way do the Nem remain cleansed and purified from the blood and sin of this generation. 
91 Now, this baptism is done either in the fashion of the Sons of Ammon in token of the sacrifice of the Son, or it is done by burial in water in token of the Lord’s own baptism as has been revealed by the prophets. 
92 And behold, when the seven companions had heard these things they were gladdened in their hearts. For, they knew that their sins were as scarlet and they desired them to be washed away. And they had repented of their sins, but they still felt keenly the effects of them. Wherefore, they begged San to stand as Peli for them, that they might make a token of their dedication to the Lord. And San assisted them in building the Lodge and in performing the purification of the Ammonites and they made a purifying sacrifice before the Lord. 
93 And when they had completed this sacrifice, whereby they emulated their Savior in the sacrifice which He was to give for the sake of all living, they went even unto Himneth and begged of her that she might baptize them in water. And, seeing the sincerity of their repentance, and also being moved upon by the Holy Ghost, she did consent to act as Peli for them in the performing of the ordinance of the baptism of the Lord’s burial. 
94 Wherefore, the seven companions guided them unto a river wherein there was much water. And Himneth took them one by one by the hand and, going down into the water with them, she did baptize them each in turn. 
95 And these are the words she did raise up unto the Lord when she did baptize the seven companions, for, she did speak as the Spirit directed, saying: 
96 Holy Father which is in Heaven, look upon us now. For we do raise up a song of thanksgiving for all that you have given us. And we do especially thank you for the sacrifice of your Son. Now take this – and she spoke the name of the individual – even into a covenant by this washing in token of the repentance he has dedicated unto you. Wherefore, having authority given of me by the Mother, and having received a commission of Jesus Christ, and also having a confirmation of that commission by the power of the Holy Ghost, I do baptize you – and she spoke again the name of the individual – in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen. 
97 And when she had spoken these words, she lowered them into the water, even to the covering of their entire body. And behold, when she raised them again out of the water, she was filled with the Holy Ghost and she did pronounce a blessing upon them, insomuch that the Spirit did come in unto them and they did speak in the tongues of angels and they did also prophesy many great things. 
98 And behold, when these things were done, San did also lay hands upon them and pronounce them Nem of his own family. 
99 And when all this was accomplished they gathered up their belongings and continued upon their journey. And behold, in every city and village they entered, they preached the Gospel of Peace unto the people and there were many who believed on their words, and also many who did not. But, in none of the cities and villages wherein they did minister were they abused in any way until they reached the City of Gad. 


CHAPTER 6 
1 Now, it was unto the City of Gad that Shigath, the brother of San and Himneth had made his journey when the brethren of Oug separated themselves from each other. And behold, Gad was an exceedingly wicked city. 
2 And when Shigath entered the city through the gate thereof the Spirit spoke to him, saying: 
3 Shigath, testify against this city. For, there is not one righteous soul in it and, surely, the Lord will smite every inhabitant of it. 
4 And behold, it was even as the Spirit gave witness unto Shigath. For, as he made his way through the streets of the city, the little children seeing him did begin to follow with taunting and mocking. And the youths took up stones to throw at him and staves they took into their hands with which to beat him. And, ere he had progressed far into the city, a great multitude gathered and ushered him with violence into the very center of the city. And, when they had reached the center of the city, they threw him to the ground and beat him brutally. 
5 And behold, this was before he had even opened his mouth to speak to anyone. Wherefore, it was as the Spirit testified to him. Verily, the City of Gad was a City of vipers. 
6 Wherefore, when he could raise himself up again from the ground, he did also raise up his hands unto the Lord and he did pray a mighty prayer unto his God for deliverance from the people. And these are the words which he spoke in the hearing of all the people: 
7 Oh God! Hear now the voice of your servant. Yea, hearken unto me, Father. For, I have come into this city upon Your errand to preach repentance and salvation unto this people. But, before any word had proceeded out of my mouth, the people, young and old, did take up their stones and their staves to beat me. And they did set upon me with violence. Wherefore, I do give thanks unto You, Father, that You did see fit to send me even into this evil city, that I, by the power of the Holy Ghost, might prophesy against it for Your Son’s sake. 
8 For I know that He is come into the world even now and shall take up His cross. And if it be my cross that I shall be cast to the earth and even beaten unto death in this place, I shall still raise up my voice in thanksgiving for the knowledge that I have of the saving grace of my Redeemer. 
9 Wherefore, Father, look upon me now. I do not ask to be delivered from the multitude of this sinful city, for I would be even as my Savior, if it be that You do ask it of me. And behold, if I may sacrifice my life for the sake of Him who is mighty to save, then I shall esteem myself blessed forever and ever. 
10 And behold, when the multitude heard his words, for he spoke with the power of the Holy Ghost and they did pierce them as with arrows, they did pull back from him and they ceased to lay hold upon him and to beat him. And, seeing this, Shigath was strengthened and he continued, saying: 
11 Yea, Father, hear my voice! For, I came into this city to testify of the Christ, and behold, before even I had opened my mouth they have sought to take away my life. But I do raise up my heart and my soul unto You with thanksgiving. For, even if my life is taken this day at the hands of evil men, I shall raise up my voice in praise of my God and in thanks for all wherein He does bless me. For behold, if I do lose my life in testifying of the Christ, it shall be an honor unto me and I shall rejoice in it. For Jesus is a worthy name to take even unto death! 
12 And when he had said this, one man stood forth and spoke evil words against him, saying: 
13 Behold, it is even as I have told you. This is one like unto he who came even unto my own city. Yea, one such as he, in the same apparel and speaking with the same strangeness, did come into the City of Laman and testified against us. And some there were that believed on his words but they are all dead or cast out of the city. Believe me, you people of Gad, this one is a trouble maker just as that other and you should do unto him as we did unto his brother. 
14 For, he will testify against you because of your riches and because that you are elevated above all that is common in the land. Do not let him speak, for they who are not of your distinction shall find reason to rise up against you because of his words. Yea, they will feel justified because of his teaching to kill you and take away all that you possess. And behold, they who are common shall take possession of your women and children to make slaves of them. I say unto you, Do not listen unto this man nor let him speak. For, all his words will speak evil concerning you and this city. Yea, call upon the guard of the city to take this man and kill him. If you do not, you will be sorry. For, the poor will have occasion in him to rise against you. And after this manner did he speak against Shigath unto the people of Gad to incite them to take away his life. 
15 But Shigath did but look upon him and answered him not, but smiled on him and prayed again unto the Father, saying: 
16 Oh great Father which is in Heaven. I forgive this man for the evil words which he has spoken against me. For, how can he know that I am like unto some other man who has come into the land. Yea, he knows nothing of what he speaks and does testify to me unto this people without knowledge. Wherefore, I do forgive him his words. And behold, if the multitude does take away my life because of the words which he has spoken in his ignorance, I do forgive him of it also. For, if they do take away my life, it shall be because I do lift up my voice unto heaven and testify of the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. 
17 And yet another man stood forth and spoke unto the multitude, saying: 
18 Hold, my brethren. For you know not what this man is. Shall we take away a man’s life upon the rumor? I say unto you, Let us rightly examine this man to see if there be any truth in the rumor or no. Then let us do unto him as seems us right according to our law and our custom. But, can we act now upon the words of one man against another? I say unto you, It must be admitted that our ways are not the same as all the cities in this land, for we are more blessed than they all. But, can it be said that we have left the path laid out for us by our law? Wherefore, let us take this man and examine him straitly. 
19 And the multitude were in accord, for the words of Shigath had filled them with dread. But behold, they were also filled with anger. For, they had heard of the preaching of a new prophet in the City of Laman and they desired not any preaching of the sort in their city. Wherefore, they took Shigath and they bound him by the hands and set a rod to span his arms, that he had not the liberty to use them and stopped his mouth that he could not speak. And behold, they caused that he should walk thus bound and gagged through the midst of the throng even up to the place where the Chief Judge of the city did sit to hear the complaints of higher magnitude. And there, before the judge, they did cast him down before the judge, and he was made low before the majesty of him they had elevated to a high position. 
20 And the judge, having been apprised of the complaint against Shigath, saw that the multitude was against him in spirit and he spoke to the multitude, saying: 
21 Who shall speak for this man? And none came forward. And he continued, saying: 
22 Then let his gag be removed. 
23 And when this was done, the multitude cried out and a great clamor rose up from them that the judge should not let the man speak, for his words would be nothing but evil concerning the people of Gad. But he raised his hand and called in the guard to quiet the people. And when the people were all quieted again, he made inquiry of witnesses as to what evil the man had spoken. And, looking down upon the accused, he asked him: 
24 What have you testified before this people that has made them rise up so? What evil have you professed that they should wish me to cast you into prison or take away your life? Speak truly, for I am a servant of the people and shall know if you lie. And Shigath answered him, saying: 
25 Behold, of a surety I have not testified ought of these people, nor of your city. I did but enter into the city and was immediately set upon. And I had not crossed one street but that the people of this city did take me and beat me and take hold of me to take away my life. 
26 And the judge answered him, saying: 
27 Surely this people shall not have done this thing without some provocation. What are you and where do you come from? For, I see that your raiment is course and of a kind the commoners wear. And every citizen of this city knows our law – that no common man may enter the city without his master to guide him and speak for him. For behold, we are a chosen people and God has elevated us above the common folk. Wherefore, they live in a common way without the city, and we, being elevated above them, live with distinction within it. Wherefore, who are you, that you should breach the peace and the law of our city thus, coming into the gate dressed as you are in the rags of the common man? 
28 And Shigath answered him, saying: 
29 I am Shigath, the son of Sanempet, who is the high priest of the City of Mentina of the Nem. I am the same as any citizen of that city and my raiment is that which I choose, as a free man, to wear. I know not if I am common, but that I am a free citizen of a free city, the son of a free man and slave of no man. 
30 Now hearing this, the judge became concerned. For, it was also in their law that no free man should stand bound before the judgment seat and, in this, he perceived that he had erred. Wherefore, he commanded that Shigath be loosed from his bonds and he continued his examination, saying: 
31 You will forgive the rashness of the good people of our city. For, we have heard rumors of strange prophets in the land who come into the cities and make havoc among the common and the poor. I say unto you, whoever you are, You shall not have the liberty to do this in our city, if you be such a one. 
32 Now, you have declared yourself to be a free man from a free city and the son of a free man. If you be no slave to any man, answer me in this: Why do you choose to attire yourself as a slave? 
33 And Shigath answered him, saying: 
34 In my city there is no slave, but all are free men and women. 
35 And the judge answered: 
36 Yea, we know of this law. For, in our city also there is no slave and all are free men. Behold, this is our law, that no slave or common man may come into the city. Wherefore, we are free within the city walls of the rabble of the poor. But look you, we are distinct from the rabble by our mode of dress. It is easy to know who is rich and who is poor, who is bond and who is free, by that distinction. 
37 And Shigath answered him: 
38 Nay, it is not so in Mentina, nor in any city in the Land Northward. For, all men and women are free and there are no poor. No one has the ownership of any other person at all, for we have all things in common, even as we have been taught by our prophets and from on high. In Mentina, there is no city wall and there is not one slave in all the land. 
39 And the judge answered: 
40 Now I understand then why you attire yourself as a common man. It is clear to me that all are equally common in your land and in your city. Wherefore, I judge that you lie when you say that you are a free man, the son of a free man, and no man’s bondservant. For, you are all slaves one to another. 
41 Whereupon, the judge caused that the guards bind again the hands of Shigath, and they cast him down upon the floor before the judgment seat. And the judge continued, saying: 
42 I declare that this man is common and may not address us in this seat. Who will stand forward to speak for this man? Who was the man who insisted that he be examined? Let him stand forth. 
43 And the man’s name was Cishem and he did stand forth to advocate for Shigath, saying: 
44 I am Cishem, a free man of this city, and it is I who insisted that this man be brought before the judge to be examined according to our law. But behold, I do not speak for him, nor shall I, for I know not what he is nor what is crime in him, except that he has come into the city ignorant of our statutes, in the raiment of a common man. 
45 And the judge continued, saying: 
46 Very well then. Let him be examined. Tell me, Cishem, did you listen to any of this man’s words when he was rightly apprehended by the people? 
47 And Cishem answered him: 
48 Yes, I did hear him. He lifted up his voice in prayer to his God giving thanks that he had been delivered into the hands of this people. He thanked God that he might be killed in the name of one Jesus, of whom this people have heard before. Yea, he thanked his God that he might be chosen to give up his life in this name. 
49 And the judge continued: 
50 This is strange indeed. Do you mean that he spoke no words of prophecy or condemnation of our city or of our people. 
51 Nay. He spoke no such words in my hearing, but gave thanks only that God would so treat him. 
52 And the judge continued: 
53 There is nothing in our law that prevents any man, be he free or bond, from praying to his God. Therefore, I can find no fault in him in this. Who, therefore, has made accusation against him? Let him stand forward and be heard. 
54 But behold, the man would not stand forward, for he knew that he was a stranger in the city as well and that he had spoken against Shigath in rumor only. Wherefore, not knowing the laws of the city himself, he refused to stand forth, but retired quickly out of the city. Wherefore, the judge continued in his examination: 
55 We have heard of this Jesus Christ who is so prominently taught in other cities in this land, but the people have unanimously rejected this teaching. We do not believe that God shall come down from His place of eminence and live upon the earth as has been taught. Indeed, such a teaching we know to be foolishness. Behold, what man, having attained his distinction, does go down in among the commoners to be as they are and live as they do? We cannot believe it of God, nor even of the Son of God. 
56 We believe that God has given us our eminence and that it would be a dishonor to Him for us to condescend to go down out of the city to go to and from among them who have no distinction. How then, shall we believe that the very Son of God shall come in the form of man, He being a very eternal God, and walk among us as a common man? 
57 Wherefore, since testimony has been given that you gave thanks to your strange God that you might be so honored as to give up your life in the name of this Jesus, I perceive that you are of this same cult. Is it of this Jesus that you wish to teach, and is it for this purpose that you have come into our city? 
58 And Shigath answered him, saying: 59 Yea, it is as you say. 
60 And he was about to testify more, but one of the guards who had bound him and cast him to the floor struck him suddenly with a staff and commanded him to shut up his mouth. 
61 And the judge continued: 
62 Then, by the testimony of his own mouth, this man has condemned himself. For, even as we have cast out and even put to death all they who have come into our city preaching lies about this commoner, Jesus, who is supposedly to come unto all the poor and elevate to the kingdom of heaven, we must also judge this foreigner in like manner. 
63 Now, because that he is not of this city, I cannot pronounce death upon him. But, it is my decree that he be purged and smitten, that he be stripped naked and beaten, that the soles of his feet be burned, that he be bound up again and that he be cast out of the city. Let him find comfort from those who would give comfort to the slave who is cast off. 
64 And Shigath was gagged and a staff was set to span his arms that he had not the liberty of them. And he was stripped naked before the multitude. And the guard who had cast him to the floor stepped forward and beat him with the lash until his flesh did brake forth and he bled. And vinegar was cast upon his wounds and salt. And when all this was done unto him, the guards raised him to his feet and he was made to walk through the throng even to the gate of the city. And he was cast down upon the ground outside the city, bound and gagged, and the guards returned into the city and closed the gate upon him. 
65 Thus was Shigath cast out of the City of Gad and thus was he found in a lowly and abandoned state by his brother, his sister and the seven companions, having at that moment arrived at the gate. 
66 And behold, they watched with horror as the scene unfolded before them. For, they saw only that a wretch had been cast down naked by the side of the road and that he was beaten and scourged and barely sensible. 
67 And they did approach the wretch quickly and Phez, who had been a judge in his own city before the day of his repentance, took off of him his own cloak and placed it upon Shigath and Hemset anointed his wounds with precious oil. And they raised him up and carried him away to a safe place to minister unto him. 
68 And behold, when they had washed him and ministered to him, San saw that he was his brother and Himneth fell upon his neck and kissed him and he revived and beheld his relations. And Shigath cried in his anguish for the people of Gad, but San was filled with a righteous indignation. 
69 And he left Himneth, Hemset, and Korim with Shigath to care for him and went forth with his companions to testify against the city. And behold, because that Stephat and Nepham were attired as captains of the gate and Phez was richly attired, the guards at the gate gave them leave to enter. And they went straightway unto the place of judgment, and behold, the judge still sat upon the seat. And San spoke boldly as they entered into the place of judgment, saying: 
70 Who is it that has judged my brother in this place, and has beaten him, and scourged him, and in all ways made a hiss and a shame of him, and cast him desolate upon the ground still bound and helpless? Who is it that has done this un-manful thing unto a fellow creature? Let me know this man’s name and let me see his face. For, I know not the customs and the ways of this place, being a foreigner, but I would take the measure of such a creature, that I might know against whom I shall testify in this place. 
71 And the judge, hearing the bold words of San, stood forth and answered him, saying: 
72 I am Pahorat, Chief Judge of the City of Gad. It is I and none other who has pronounced right judgment upon the beggar Shigath who came into this righteous city claiming noble birth with lies, and praising God that he should be allowed to die in the name of a false Christ. This is according to the will of the people and our law. Who are you, that you should approach this seat of judgment so brazenly? But look! By your attire I perceive that you are also of this same ilk. 
73 And Phez answered him. Now, Phez knew the laws and customs of the cities in this part of the Land Southward and stood forth to speak on behalf of the foreigners, saying: 
74 Not so, Pahorat. I am Phez and was a Judge in the City of Josh. You speak unwisely of these men. Indeed, I may say that you speak without knowledge. I am this man’s companion and I advocate for him. I am this man’s companion and his advocate. We come as a body of men who say the same and claim the same. We speak and act together in this thing and we would have our answer. For, a man has been beaten and scourged and cast out of the city bound that he might perish. For what cause was he handled thus? 
75 And Pahorat answered him, saying: 
76 The man first came up to this judgment seat attired as a beggar. By our law, none such may even enter our city without proper escort. We do not excuse ourselves, for, this is our law. Let all who enter our city know it. 
77 And Phez answered him, saying: 
78 Was this man, who was obviously a foreigner, appraised of this law? Let him who told the man about the law, or let him who stretched forth his hand to him to prevent him entering the city in error come forward. Was there none at the gate? None in the streets of the city? And whoso first took hold of him, did he not instruct the man of his error? Is there no such procedure in your law? 
79 And Pahorat answered him, saying: 
80 We are not isolated among the cities. We have commerce with all. Of course there is such a provision in the law. 
81 And Phez answered him: 
82 I know that there is such a provision, for, I know that there are many merchants in the City of Laman who do business with this city. Behold, I have never heard of any of them, or of their servants and bondservants, handled in such a way. Wherefore, since it is according to your law that the stranger be informed of it, let he who did instruct this stranger come forward and make an account of it. 
83 And Pahorat said unto him: 
84 There is no such man or woman. None was needed. For, no sooner had he been brought into our presence before this seat did he begin to testify of this Christ who is to come. Wherefore, we knew him to be of a dangerous set of slaves who have attempted to rise up against their rightful masters. Yea, I myself heard him speak of this same Jesus. Wherefore, I did rightly pronounce judgment upon him quickly, that his words mayn’t take any effect upon the people. For, I know this doctrine to be a pernicious thing among they who are not of distinction. 
85 And Phez continued: 
86 Tell me, did he at any time preach of the coming of this Jesus? Or did he at any time call any to repentance? For, all that has been reported of him is that he gave thanks to his God that he might suffer death in the name of Christ. 
87 And Pahorat said: 
88 It is so. But behold, that is all I needed to hear to know that this man was dangerous. But look, do you now advocate for this San, the brother of him against whom I have passed judgment, or do you advocate in favor of this Christ? For, I shall judge you too, if either be certain. 
89 And Phez said: 
90 I do advocate for both. But behold, you shall not treat with me as you did this poor man. Nay, you shall not bind me and beat me. You shall not purge me with the lash, nor anoint my wounds with vinegar and salt. I know the law of this city and of all the cities round about. You shall not treat me as a slave or beggar. 
91 And behold, Pahorat knew that Phez spoke the truth and that he did know the law. Wherefore, fearing that his judgment against a judge of a neighbor city might bring about a contention between the two, he deferred his inquiry of Phez. But Phez did continue, saying: 
92 Of a surety, you have judged this man rightly, in that he is a stranger who knows not the customs of the land. And you do judge him rightly, in that he is a servant of this Christ, of whom we have all heard from time to time all the days of our lives. But, I ask you, if this man attempted to convince no man to believe in this Christ, you did judge him wrongfully. For, the law of this city does not attempt to govern a man’s private thoughts and beliefs. 
93 And behold, even if he had attempted to convince you of the merits of his beliefs, it is the law of this city to set such a one outside the city wall with a few stripes and an admonition. But you beat him and scourged him and then you did set him without the wall bound and marked so that any who might find him might know that the onus of the judgment seat lay upon him. And thus you left him to die without succor. Surely, you sentenced this man to death wrongfully, and now do you wonder that his brother comes inquiring as to the reason? 
94 I know also that it is contrary to the law of this city to lay hold upon any man, be he bond or free, poor or of that distinction set upon him by riches and much property, to take away his life without due cause. Now behold, according to the law, you had no such cause in this man. Wherefore did you handle him in so unlawful a manner? 
95 And Pahorat answered him, saying: 
96 Behold, we have had word of such men in the City of Laman, who come into among the people and testify against their ways and customs. We want no such men among us. Wherefore, I did pass judgment upon this man as an example to others who might think to do unto us as they have done unto other cities round about. And behold, the wild places are full of these men who have come out of the City of Laman. Shall they all come into our city and testify against us because they are cast out of their own? Let them testify against their own city. 
97 And Phez said unto him: 
98 Then I do condemn you before the law, Pahorat of the High Seat of the City of Josh. For, you have not gained your seat that you might controvert and change the law, but to prosecute and enforce it, that law which is established by they unto whom the people have given this power. Or am I mistaken in the notion that the law is made by the consent of its citizens? And have you taken upon yourself to become a King unto this city, to make its laws irrespective of the sentiments of its subjects? 
99 And behold, these words of Phez began to stir up the hearts of the people who stood round about the judgment seat. For, the people of the City of Josh were puffed up in the pride of their hearts and wanted no King to rule over them. And behold, they considered the judges to be their servants. Wherefore, the words of Phez did stir them up against Pahorat because they did call to their attention how he had not followed the law which had been given him. 
100 And the news quickly went out from the place of judgment of how Pahorat had attempted to set aside the law of the city and make himself King and a multitude began to gather to the place. 
101 And Pahorat did fear for himself and did rise up out of the judgment seat and stood forth on his feet to speak, saying: 
102 Now behold, this man has condemned me before the law and I do now stand as one man accused before this judgment seat and not the judge of it. And I do speak to defend myself before this people. 
103 Behold, I do not wish to be King, but only to preserve the ways and customs of my people. I know that the laws made by this people are for the good of all those who have such as is required to be called with distinction to rule over all the others who live round about. It is because that God has called us to this calling, and has set His seal upon the calling by giving us riches where other men have not, that we feel qualified to rule. Wherefore, since I have obtained this distinction among men in great measure, the people have chosen me to sit in judgment over causes of great matter. And I do esteem their having called upon me to do this work for them as confidence in my judgment. Wherefore, I do not attempt to remake the law, but to anticipate the will of the people. 
104 And behold, I have removed myself from the seat of judgment to defend my own actions. And there is no judge in the seat. Wherefore, I do call upon all the people gathered here to act as High Judge for the people. And I do make an inquiry of this man who makes advocacy for these foreigners. 
105 Behold, do you believe in this Jesus Christ, of whom this man has testified? Or do you also serve this false master of whom other false prophets have testified? 
106 And Phez answered him: 
107 Yea, I do believe on Him and I do testify of Him. Behold, I was of high rank among my own people and my own city, and I did pass judgment upon all according to our law. And I did puff myself up as you have done because my neighbor had less than I. And I did justify myself in not giving of my considerable substance unto the beggar because he had brought upon himself his lowly state. Yea, I did rationalize my lack of charity, and even my cruelty, because I believed that the Lord had qualified me. Yea, I did answer to all the qualifications established by my people to act as judge for them. 
108 And behold, I did also seek to take away the life of one of these false prophets, as you say. But, when I did stretch out my hand to smite the man, even this same brother of he whom you have scourged, behold, I was smitten and cast down to the earth. But I say unto you, It was not by the hand of this man that I was cast down, but by the power of the Spirit which was in him. 
109 And when I was thus smitten and cast down unto the earth, I did pass from before men as one who is dead. And I was taken into a place wherein I might be judged of my works. And One sat upon a judgment seat before me and examined my mind and my heart. But He did not examine me with vain words. Nay, He looked upon me and knew my thoughts, and He looked into me and knew my heart and my intentions. 
110 Behold, this same who examined me and knew me without a word is Jesus Christ who will come. And He did fill my mind with a clearer understanding of my own wickedness. And, when He had shown me all my deeds and thoughts, He revealed to me the awful state of those who, seeing what I had seen, refuse to repent and go on to that futurity which awaits the wicked. And behold, my soul was wracked with the knowledge that I must remain in eternity, not in the state of bliss afforded by that worthiness that I assumed the blessings of my earthly prosperity gave ample proof, but rather in an awful state of unending woe and misery. Do not attempt to imagine my agony, for you cannot perceive of such things and remain in the body. 
111 Wherefore, I did cry out unto the Lord before whom I knelt, that I might be given opportunity to repent of my wickedness and return at some later date before that same judgment seat to be examined again, perchance a different outcome might befall me. 
112 Now, I know not if anything I may do in this life can overcome the immensity of my crimes, but I know this – I shall not wish to entertain that great Lord again in His great wrath. But rather, I would kneel before Him and beg His forgiveness, hoping that what I do henceforth may have some effect upon His judgment. 
113 Now behold, He did grant my desire, wherefore, I do testify not only of my belief in the words of these men, but also that I have seen the face of this Jesus Christ. Yea, I declare unto you that He is not a false Christ, as you flatter yourself in styling Him, and these are not false prophets. And I admonish you to hearken unto their words. 
114 Now behold, when Phez had finished speaking in this manner, the people were all taken aback by the things which he had spoken. And even Pahorat was also abashed. But he was also wounded in his pride because of the things which Phez had testified, and also afraid that he might be taken in some offense. Wherefore, he did press forward with his suit, saying: 
115 Behold, you have at last answered my question. Yea, in the hearing of all the people, you have declared that you are also for this Christ, the teaching of whom this people have condemned. And if, as you say, you come as a body of men to advocate for these heathen from the north, then you also are all alike convicted of your testament of this false Christ. 
116 And behold, the people are all responsible for this law which does dictate that all who profess this Christ shall be cast out of the city. Wherefore, I am justified in demanding that you all be removed from this place and cast out, for, you are all of the same molding and we can only expect the same language from you all. 
117 And behold, the people all cried out in one voice in favor of the demand. For, although they wished no king to rule over them, they also knew that they had condoned a law that testified against them and they wished no further exposure to prophets who condemned for the distinction which they enjoyed over their fellow men. Wherefore, they cried mightily that the men be cast out of the city. 
118 But behold, once again San stretched forth his hand before them that sought to take hold of them and cried: 
119 Nay, touch us not! For we are all filled with that Holy Ghost of which Phez spoke. And behold, though he realize it not, and believe it not, he is forgiven of his sins and stands blameless before God this day because of the testimony he has given of His Son. Stretch not forth your hands to take hold of any of us. For, in the moment that you do, the Lord will smite you from on high. 
120 And the people did not heed the words of San and did proceed to rush upon the men to take hold of them in order that they might cast them out from among their midst. And there was a great tumult in the place of judgment and a great multitude rushed forward upon the little band of prophets to take hold of them. But behold, they could not. 
121 And the mob did begin to contend with one another with their fists in competition over who might actually lay hold of the men, but none could, and they began mightily to contend one with another in great confusion. And, when all was in confusion and all the host was contenting one with another, there was a great sound and a rush of commotion. And behold, all the people fell to their knees and then upon their faces, excepting Pahorat, the Chief Judge of the City of Gad. 
122 And when all was quiet, San lifted up his voice again to Pahorat, to prophesy against him, saying: 
123 Behold, you have testified against us and caused that we be cast out from among the people of Gad. Yea, you have lifted up a testimony most false before the face of the only real Judge in the Universe. Do you suppose that your life in this city is worth anything? Do you suppose that any of your wealth or your costly things can buy you distinction now? 
124 For behold, the tale will go forth that the prophets of God were set upon by a great multitude in the City of Gad at the instigation of the Chief Judge. And the story will go forth that a great multitude of men, even hundreds, could not subdue the prophets and all were cast down to the earth – all excepting the Chief Judge. And you will be esteemed the cause of all this mischief. 
125 And behold, can you imagine that all they who have been cast down this day for attempting to do exactly that which Phez and indeed all these my companions attempted to do, will not now go to that same place and experience all that befell each of these? What will be their opinion of you when they do return unto their senses? 
126 Behold, I say unto you, There will be some who continue in their wicked ways who will seek to take away your seat and your life because they saw not you also kneeling before that great Judge. Will they support you now, oh Chief Judge of the City of Gad? 
127 And what of those who shall repent as these men have repented? What? Will you have all these prostrate men put to the sword, that you need not risk some of them going forth and testifying of the Christ? 
128 For, He does now live even as you and I live. Yea, He is a reality which you must face. He has promised to come even here into our part of the world, for He redeems His people. But, shall He redeem you? 
129 And behold, the place began again to fill with yet more people. And they looked upon all they who had fallen and wondered. And it was as San had prophesied, they did look up even unto Pahorat and were amazed. For, of all the men of the city assembled, he was the only one who had not been smitten even to the ground. Yea, he stood upon his own feet and had not fallen as if dead. 
130 And San spoke unto them, saying: 
131 Behold, the Lord has smitten all these men because of the action of this same you see before you. Yea, even he who is chief among you has brought upon this city misery so great that it cannot be expressed. For, because of the wickedness of this city and of this people, when the Lord does come even unto this country to redeem His own, the City of Gad shall burn and every soul in it. Thus has the Spirit spoken unto me that I should say unto this people, and thus shall be the fate of all who repent not and remain in the City of Gad. 
132 Wherefore, repent and leave this place. For, the Lord has spoken against it for the wickedness which is in it. 
133 And, when he had pronounced these things, San and his companions strode out of the city unmolested. For, none dared assail them and all were amazed at them. 


CHAPTER 7 
1 And the companions of San did inquire of him, and Stephat, who was captain of the gate in the City of Josh, spoke for them, saying: 
2 Of a surety, the Lord is with you, San. For, even when you are in your wrath, you do great miracles. For, who can deny that the mob would have laid hands on us and taken away our lives were it not for the power that is in you. 
3 And San said unto him: 
4 Do not think that ought that I do is of me, or that it is by any power in me that these things are done. Behold, in my own home I am a simple farmer and I grow fruit for the tables of my family and my neighbors. The things which I say and do are only those things wherein the Spirit prompts me. 
5 And Stephat was astonished at San and pressed him, saying: 
6 How does one know what to say and do? Does the Spirit manifest such things in certain ways? For, I too felt a great thing in my heart, or I shall say, in my entire being when I heard your words, and I am sure that the people felt the same thing. For behold, we were all alike amazed. But, how do you know what the Spirit prompts as opposed to that which comes of your own emotion? 
7 For, I know that the warrior who goes into battle must stir up the emotion in his heart in order that he might do that which is necessary for him. And it is a great part of the training of the warrior to know how to control and to use his wrath in the heat of battle. 
8 And San answered him, saying: 
9 Nay, the Spirit usually leaves one alone in their ire. But behold, the Lord did call me to go forth and preach unto my brethren in the Land Southward, and I was instructed to go even unto the more wicked and proud portion of the land. Wherefore, my Lord, knowing my character well, preserves me even in my wrath. And the Spirit does confirm in my mind and my bosom the things that I must do. For, even in the midst of my righteous indignation, for who can deny that the things done to my sister and my brother ought to give rise to such, I felt a peace come upon me suddenly in the moment that I was to speak. And that peace springing up from within my bosom, is the manifestation which the Spirit has used in me from my youth to teach me and instruct me and testify to me of truth. Wherefore, I knew that the words were not the imaginings of my heart, but verily, the words of God. 
10 Behold, as you become more accustomed to the workings of the Spirit, you will recognize the ways in which He does manifest Himself in you. It may be different than the way in which He does manifest unto me, but you will know it. And, when the Holy Ghost confirms a thing in you, see that you always hearken unto it. For, to deny the Holy Ghost is a perilous thing. 
11 And Stephat said unto him: 
12 I think I have experienced this thing. For, when I knelt before the Lord, yea, when I prostrated myself before the judgment seat of the Lord, I felt a great welling up inside of me that seemed to fill my whole being. And when He did proclaim to me who He was and showed me all my sins, I knew without doubt that the things He said were true and that He is the very Creator and Savior. This is the thing that I cannot deny, for my soul cries out with it from every fiber. Is this the manifestation of the Spirit? 
13 And San answered him, saying: 
14 Yea. This is the beginning of the unspeakable gift which only God may give, even the Gift of the Holy Ghost. Rejoice in it this day, for you now know of a surety the manner in which the Holy Ghost does work in you. Wherefore, whereas I feel a peace deep within me, you feel a powerful welling up and every fiber cries out. When you feel this manifestation, see that you do the thing that comes into your mind and see that you speak the words that form there. For, the things that come to you under the influence of the Holy Ghost are the very things that the Lord would do, were He here to do them. Yea, in that moment, you become the Arm and the Mouth of the Lord God. Would that the Holy Ghost could make arms and mouths of us all, but the wicked do prevent it. 
15 And Phez did also open his mouth to speak, saying: 
16 It is with me even as Stephat has expressed. When I did begin to examine the Pahorat I did begin in the manner of all legalists. But behold, I felt as if it were someone else that was speaking. I felt as if I were merely a bystander listening to my own voice, but the words belonged to another. And behold, I knew the direction of the speaking and the desired end, but I felt as if some other person was pleading the case instead of me. 
17 And San praised him, saying: 
18 Rejoice, Phez, for you too have felt how the Spirit does foreknow our talents and abilities and use them to the Lord’s purposes. Behold, when you did advocate for us before the judge, it was the Lord who was our advocate through you. 
19 And San continued to teach them along the way, saying: 
20 Take heed to the promptings of the Holy Ghost. For, He is not as you and I, nor even like unto our Father which is in Heaven. Nay, nor even like unto the Savior, who lives even now in the Land of Jerusalem. Behold, He is a personage of Spirit and has not a body of flesh nor of bone. His substance is not tangible to any who live in the physical world, but is discernible only by the living spirit within each of us. His voice is not heard by the ears of our body, but by the ears of our spirits. Behold, this is why we feel His influence more than we see or hear Him. 
21 And many prophets have described His influence as a still, small voice. But the Nem, being Healers, know that to hear a voice with the ears of our bodies it cannot be still, for, it is the movement of the sound that causes us to hear. Yea, it is the movement of one matter upon another that brings about the physical hearing. Wherefore, the voice of the Holy Ghost cannot be as the voice of our bodies, for else, it could not be still. 
22 And we also know that the voice of the Spirit does break upon all the matter within us, and even upon the matter surrounding us. Wherefore, we know that the voice of the Holy Ghost is not small. But, I ask you, how does one describe so great a thing? The still, small voice is figurative for me because the Spirit does speak like thunder unto me. 
23 And when the Holy Ghost does begin to manifest Himself unto you, He does transmit the actual thoughts and feelings of the Lord unto every particle of you. Behold, this is the Endowment of Power that is peculiar to the Holy Ghost. Do not expect Him to manifest Himself unto you as an angel, for such is not His calling. But He will always manifest through the feelings of your own body, for it is the movement of His spiritual matter upon that which is spiritual within you that causes the sensations, just as the movement of matter upon matter causes you to be able to hear the words which I speak unto you. Behold, the laws that apply to both are similar laws and they are universal. 
24 And behold, when you exercise that which is spiritual in you to the extent that you begin to walk and talk with the Holy Ghost in a sacred manner, that which is spiritual in you begins to overcome that which is purely physical. Then do the gifts of the Spirit begin to manifest in you also. Then may you speak with angels and in the tongue of angels. Then may you be introduced upon the Way and walk and talk with Heavenly Beings. And again, then you may begin to take up vipers and be harmed not by them. And then, by the word of your mouth, may you bless the sufferer and see them take up their bed and walk. Yea, then may you lay hands upon the deaf and they shall hear, and then may you lay hands upon the blind and they shall see. 
25 For this exercise causes the movement of that substance which is Christ’s that fills the Universe. Yea, and this exercise causes the spiritual matter within you to move upon the spiritual matter of creation. And when matter moves upon matter, be it spiritual or physical, this causes change. 
26 Or which of you have not set your hand to a stone to move it out of your way? Is it not the movement of the matter of your hand that causes the movement of the matter of the stone? And behold, does the ground beneath the stone remain the same? And does the stone not displace air as it moves? And the movement of all these things cause movement in many things more until it begins to become difficult to record all of the movement. 
27 Behold, thus is it with the movement of spiritual matter. And with each such swelling and movement of that which is spiritual within you, that which is spiritual in the Universe also swells and moves. 
28 And who of you, having begun to undertake a new task and exerting yourselves, do not feel the unfamiliarity of the muscles to the new task for a time? But, after a while, the task becomes familiar and the difficulty subsides. For, do you not become stronger and grow with each new task taken as you accustom yourselves to it? 
29 Behold, thus it is with that which is spiritual within you. As you learn and grow with the Holy Ghost as your guide, that which is spiritual within you grows stronger. And, if you are steady in your course, the spiritual body grows, even as your muscles grew in order that they might effectively handle the sword or build a house. Yea, the spirit within you grows and expands, even until it supersedes the physical. 
30 It is when this begins to take place that you are taken upon the Way and instructed by your grandfathers. Yea, for they have an interest in your success and will always assist you. And they have lived this life and have much to give you by way of instruction and experience. And, in this way is your heart turned to them and theirs to you. Yea, in this way are you introduced into the Terrestrial World while you are yet in the body, even as has been by the prophets. 
31 Wherefore, it behooves us all to continually experiment upon this faith, for it is that which holds sway in the Universe, even the substance of it. And behold, it is the movement of this substance that extends outward forever. Wherefore, what little you do in the spirit of peace here in this mortality, does progress and grow throughout all eternity. 
32 And behold, eternity is a great hoop. And all that you send out into it does grow and expand as it moves matter upon matter. And because it is a great eternal round, that which you send out into it does return again unto you greatly magnified. Wherefore, if there be some poor soul who suffers, and by the gift of the Spirit you relieve that suffering, behold, that working moves upon the expanse of creation to bring about a miracle in the sufferer, as also in you. And the power of the Holy Ghost does also expand upon that which you receive according to this law. 
33 Can you see then, how miracles take place in the lives of them who believe on the name of Christ and do continually seek to associate with Him through the Holy Ghost? And can you see how they who seek not that association seldom see miracles in their lives? It is not to be expected. For, it is only by the movement of the Light of Christ, which is that spiritual substance which fills the Universe and gives light and life unto the physical matter, that miracles take place. And behold, it is only he who can associate with the Holy Ghost who can make exercise upon this matter, even upon this faith. 
34 Now, I do not say that this is the only way in which the Holy Ghost may effect a miracle, for, He may do many things by intervention. Behold, this is how you were conveyed in your sinful state upon tthe Way, where the reality of Christ was made known unto you and your every sin was made manifest. But, I do say that miracles come as two outcomes. The first being that intervention which the Lord deems necessary, through the Holy Ghost. The other is by and through that association of matter of which I have spoken. 
35 And it was after this manner that San did teach his companions as they made their journey back to the place where they had left Shigath, Himneth and their companions. 
36 And behold, when they had returned unto the place, they found all well and ready to continue upon which the Lord had called them. And, after they had recounted all that had transpired in the City of Gad, they determined to pray to know which city to go to next. For, they knew that the Lord had not sent them into the Land Southward to testify unto all cities, only those that were among the most wicked. Wherefore, they did pray mightily unto the Lord to show them the direction they should travel. 
37 And the Lord did direct them to travel up into the City of Kishkumen, even that city which was the very capital of the Gadiantons in the Land Southward. 
38 Now, this was cause for some concern in the hearts of the seven companions, for, they knew of the city and that of all cities in the Land Southward, Kishkumen was known to be the vilest and most wicked of places. And they knew that the Nephites had often, in times past, attempted to root the Gadiantons from out of the land. But behold, every time that they regained their power in the land, it was from Kishkumen that their influence flowed. Wherefore, they were concerned that the prophets would wish to go into that region. Notwithstanding their fears, however, they had pledged themselves unto them and agreed to go up with them to the City of the Gadiantons. 
39 Now, Korim, who had been a slave in the City of Josh, and whose master had freed him and gave him leave to walk about the city in his name, he knew the ways of the Gadiantons, for he had somewhat to do with them in the past. For, since the day of his emancipation, he had made his way as a beggar before the people. Wherefore, he could watch from his lowly station the activities of the rich. And behold, he was also known unto some of the robbers and also he knew the way into the city. 
40 For, the City of Kishkumen was built up in a curious way, not like the other cities in the land. Behold, it was accessible only through a narrow ravine through which a river flowed. And the road into it was treacherous and crossed the river at many places. And also, if one knew not the exact entrance into the city itself, one might wander for days in the canyon and find nothing. But Korim had heard tell of the way into the city and thought he could guide them from the description he had heard. 
41 But behold, ere they even entered into the ravine itself, they were met by a party of men who were returning from their business and these men sought to rob them while they made their way. But Korim strode forth to meet them and speak with them, saying: 
42 Behold, I am Korim and I am a beggar of the City of Josh. I come with these, my companions, to deliver a message unto all the inhabitants of Kishkumen. Will you guide us up to the city? 
43 And the leader of the band of robbers answered him, saying: 
44 A beggar of Josh, that is high praise. There are not many who may lay claim to that title. Do you wish to join us in our stronghold, beggar Korim, and become one of us? 
45 And Korim answered him, saying: 
46 Nay, I am satisfied to work as I do, there are among my party who have important intelligence to give unto the rulers of this city concerning the Land Northward. Will you assist us, that they might deliver their message? 
47 Now, the Gadiantons were prevalent in the Land Southward. Yea, they were to be found in all the cities, and in most, there were their members placed in the seats of the lesser judges. Wherefore, all the land was plagued with the robbers and there was nowhere that was safe from them. Yea, they were the common scourge of the Land Southward. 
48 Wherefore, there was also much competition among the robbers themselves and they were always hungry for intelligence about other places from which to take their spoils. For, the robbers labored not to make their livings, but they stole what they needed and gained great wealth from theft. Wherefore, the prophets were escorted into the City of Kishkumen by a band of the Gadiantons. 
49 Now, this was difficult for the prophets. For, their father had gained great renown in the Land Northward in ferreting out the Gadiantons and preaching repentance unto them. And behold, all they who would not repent from their wickedness, and who would not covenant to leave the land after he had ferreted them out, he did put to death with the sword. For, the Gadiantons were wicked indeed, and Sanempet was determined that they should not in any way destroy the peace of the land. 
50 Wherefore, he was led by the Spirit to find them out and to make every attempt to convert them to the ways and customs of the Nem. And many there were who did repent and they became Nem, and behold, their children sit with us today in the temple. 
51 But, all those who would not convert or depart out of the land, Sanempet did challenge to battle, and the bands being emboldened that he was but one man did always take up his challenge. Wherefore, by the strength of his arm he did punish them, and by the strength and power of the Holy Ghost he did defeat them and put them to the sword. But behold, Sanempet had not as much need for this sort of strength as his father, Hagmeni, for the Spirit was strong in him, even to the convincing of most. 
52 Wherefore behold, the thought of entering into the great capital and chief City of the Gadiantons was strange to them indeed. And they proceeded into the city unmolested and unharmed, for their escort thought them to be of like character to themselves. 
53 And when they had entered through the secret way into the city, they saw Shimnet, even their own brother, standing upon a low wall crying repentance unto the people of the city as they passed by him. And behold, no one even looked up to hear his words and he was ignored by all. And, when they approached their brother and recognized him, and he them, they all embraced each other and rejoiced. 
54 But behold, the robbers who had been their guides looked on and pondered what they saw. For, Korim had told them that these people had intelligence from the Land Northward and they felt somewhat betrayed by him because they appeared now to be familiar with the lunatic who stood on the walls all the day long preaching of the destruction of their city. 
55 But they were not too surprised, and also perhaps a little pleased also. For, the beggar had by lies and artifice convinced them to escort them safely into their city. And this was the custom of the people of Kishkumen, that by stealth, lies and cunning, they made their livings. Wherefore, they did respect Korim at least for his cunning in deceiving them. And by this artifice the party did find favor, at least to some small degree, in the eyes of their guides who laughed at each other and at themselves because of the deception. 
56 And they determined among themselves that it would be foolishness to take these people up to the rulers of the city, for there was no profit in it for them. Wherefore, they left them standing with their brother in the streets of Kishkumen. 
57 And behold, this was according to their custom with regard to those who were of not great risk or threat to the city. For, the city was exceedingly difficult to assail by any body of men, but easy to access by any that was small enough to pass through along the secret way. Wherefore, the city was open to any who was able to find their way into it, but closed to any army wishing to assail it. For, the way in was steep and narrow and only wide enough for one man to pass in many places. And, because of this, no army could enter the city, for, even a small party of men could defend it against thousands. 
58 Now, when the brethren of Oug found themselves once again together, they embraced each other and rejoiced. And Shimnet took them to a small home which he had acquired and used for shelter during his stay in Kishkumen. And when the party was made comfortable, they informed Shimnet of all that had happened unto them in the cities where they had testified. 
59 And behold, when he related his story and made his report, they were all astonished. For, they believed that a prophet in this, the most wicked of cities in the land, must not be received with any favor at all by the people. But Shimnet told a tale not of favor and acceptance, but that the people completely ignored him and his teaching. And this did astonish the party. And Shimnet inquired of them, saying: 
60 I am alike astonished and amazed as you are by my tale. For, I believed that this City of vipers must have been the most wicked in all the land. For behold, all the Gadiantons issue forth from this place to wreak havoc upon all the people in the Land Southward. And I could not believe that I would be allowed to open my mouth at all before them. 
61 But, for all that Kishkumen is the seat of all wickedness and the capital of the Gadiantons, the people do treat with each other with justice within their own city. Yea, there is not one person who does walk upon the streets of the city in hunger, or athirst. And, if one lacks clothing, it is freely given. And for money, none lack. Indeed, all give freely of their substance to the needy. And, if you believe it not, look upon this little house of mine and ask me how I did acquire it and furnish it. For, I came into the city without purse or script. 
62 And behold, it has been exceedingly difficult to testify against this city. For, by comparison, the people live here just as we do in Mentina, having all things is common. But, they do live by theft and by destruction and this is a great evil. Wherefore, I do not make my comparison very strongly. But behold, among their own, they live by charity and every person imparts to the needy from out of that substance they have stolen. Does this not seem strange to you? 
63 And Korim, the beggar, answered him, saying: 
64 It is not strange at all, Shimnet. For, this is the way that is forced upon all they who would live among the Nephites in comfort. For behold, the Nephites do set the standard for who is rich and who is poor by their pride. And the poor are often cast out among them, or cast aside in their hearts. This causes discontent in the hearts of many. For, though they wish not to be like unto the Nephites in their hearts, their very society causes to well within them the desire to get gain. And, if they cannot get gain by the sweat of their face because of the vanity and the jealousy of the rich among the Nephites, they turn to theft to gain thereby. 
65 And San spoke to them, saying: 
66 This must be our plan. We must go among the people of this city and testify against the Nephites and against their great pride and lust for gain. We must in all things testify against the Nephites so that the people of this city may be drawn in to listen to our voices and hearken unto our words. We shall not incite them to any kind of violence against the Nephites, but let us bring to their eyes the wickedness of this standard which has been set up by their brethren the Nephites. Then, when we have the ear of the people, let us teach them how upright their own standard is and how they ought to use it for good. Then we shall teach them of the right way to apply that which they already have as a custom among their own people. Do you not think this is a good plan? 
67 And Himneth spoke, saying: 
68 Nay, brother, I do not think it a good plan at all. For, though I see your intention, it is but a strategy and a deception. Do you not think that these people, who live by deception and artifice, when they see the deception, will not simply applaud the deception and go about their own business again? 
69 And behold, their business is evil. We know how they destroy all that they meet in the Land Northward. And they insinuate themselves into positions of authority in cities and in governments in order to do their evil. What does it matter that they come back here and treat each other amicably? We must never forget that they do all manner of wickedness in the world at large and they do bring down whole societies with their evil. 
70 We are no deceivers. Let us not teach the word of the Lord through any kind of deception. We ought not think that we may teach true principles by weaving them in with false. This is a thing our prophets have warned us will be the absolute destruction of the Nephites, and even the ruin in the latter days of they whom the Lord will use to spread His gospel among all nations. Let us not take up this device before this people. 
71 And Korim answered her before San, saying: 
72 Hearken unto your sister, San, for she speaks wisely. Do not believe that you can deceive these people with your words. For, you are not one who can mix anything. Your words are strong and true and they are filled with the Holy Ghost. Do not darken counsel nor play games with these people. For they will see through you and smile, and even appreciate your attempt to be like them. But do not believe that this will cause them to want to become like unto you in return. 
73 And San answered in his turn, saying: 
74 But, do you not think that the end justifies us in using this strategy? For, which of you can say that the Nephite custom is good? And I do agree with you, Korim, that it is the ways and customs of the Nephites in perverting the right way of the Lord, that has given rise to the Gadiantons. Wherefore, there is no real artifice in this plan. Let us undertake to cause the people of this city to see the rightness of their ways, with regard to themselves, and the very wrongness of their ways with regard to others. And, if it seem deception, then let the end, which is greatly to be desired, justify the means we use to achieve it. 
75 But Himneth answered him, saying: 
76 Is any good end worth achieving by bad means. Behold, the Spirit whispers to me that this will come to vanity. For behold, this people are expert and accomplished in just what you propose to do. Yea, they make their way in life entirely by such means. And those of the Gadiantons who have made themselves great in the eyes of the Nephites, and are made judges unto them, do so by first convincing their neighbors of the righteousness. Then, when they have acquired their desire, they turn the city to wickedness. We cannot use such a device, for, you must recall that the Lord sent us into this land to prepare the hearts of them that are willing to make a righteous sacrifice for their neighbors. 
77 Brother, I say unto you, This is not the way. For, no good end is justified by evil means. Behold, there will be many in this land at this time who will claim that the desired end does justify devious means, but it will never be so for all of their claiming. And there will come a day when even the elect of God will contrive devious means in order that they might bring cause into the hearts of the Saints that they might do the things that their rulers think is expedient for them. And this will seem good to all for a time, but it will bring about the break up of the church in the last days. 
78 This has been seen by our prophets, and behold, it is part of the vision and foresight of Hementim and Shi-Tugo, and the reason they set up Zion in our communities. And our father, Hagoth, and indeed all the fathers of our people, did agree to do this. Let us not dishonor them by breaking with those good things revealed unto our fathers for our good. Please, go now into a closet and pray mightily unto the Lord, that the Holy Ghost might direct us in our preaching unto this people. 
79 And San did as his sister instructed. He retired unto the place his brother, Shimnet, had set up for a place of prayer. And he did entreat the Lord as to the best method and plan to use in order that they might accomplish the Lord’s design in the City of Kishkumen. And behold, the Lord did visit him upon the Way. And these are the words of the Lord unto him: 
80 Behold, San my servant, I am pleased with thy zeal in wishing to put an end to the Gadiantons through the preaching of my word unto them. And, it is a good intention, for, who can deny that to end the Gadiantons in their own city would not be beneficial unto all the people, both of the Land Southward and of the Land Northward. In this desire of thy heart, I am well pleased. 
81 But behold, I say unto thee, I shall soon end My ministry unto Mine own people here in the land of thy origin and, when I have finished My work here, My own people will put Me to the death. But, be of good cheer. For, after that they have killed My body, for I shall give them leave to do even this, I shall rise again, according to that which was established from the beginning. And I shall come unto Mine own again and all who believe on Me shall I redeem. 
82 And behold, San my servant, in the moment of My death, and for as long as I lay in the tomb, there shall be a great destruction and tumult in this, the Land Southward. And even in the Land Northward there shall be tumult, but not so severe as that calamity which shall come upon this people. And all the truly wicked shall be destroyed from off the face of the Land Southward. 
83 Behold, I say unto thee, The day of which I speak cometh quickly. Wherefore, stand up among this people and preach to them and prophecy of the coming destruction only. They shall know of what sort they are and, in the day of destruction, they shall remember thy words unto them. 
84 But behold, unto all the cities whereunto I have sent thee and thine, I shall visit with a fire from heaven. For, the people of these cities wax gross in their iniquities and I will utterly destroy them, not by the natural calamity that will befall other cities in this land, but by an all consuming fire out of heaven. 
85 And this is my commandment unto thee: Thou shalt preach my pure word unto this people and think not to convert them in any thing. For they are most wicked and shall mock even Me to thy face. Wherefore, thou shalt send thy brethren and thy sister away, to begin their journey back into thine own land. And thou shalt continue the work that thy brother Shimnet has begun here in this city until the day that I shall send thee also back into the lands of the Nem, And then thou shalt go speedily out of this city, for the people will diligently seek to take away thy life. But, be not fearful. For, just as I have preserved thee in other places, I shall preserve thy life in this place also. 
86 And many other things did the Lord speak unto San that he would not share, for they are not to be spoken at this time. But, to his credit, after that the Holy Ghost had confirmed in him all that the Lord had commanded him, San did all the words of the Lord. 
87 And behold, he instructed his brethren and his sister to fly speedily out of the city, for the Lord had called him not to convert the people, but to testify unto them of their imminent destruction. And they did follow his counsel, and all of the seven companions went with them out of the city, except Korim. For, Korim had made a covenant to go with San into whatever the Lord did command him. 
88 And the prophets and their companions did escape from the vilest and most wicked nest of vipers in all the land as easily as they had entered it. For, no one molested them as they made their escape. 
89 But, San and Korim remained in the city and set themselves up together on a embankment before the street which ran through it to preach unto the people. And San did preach mightily unto the people. And these are the words he preached unto them: 
90 Behold, thus does the Lord God say unto this people: 
91 It would be good for all whoso liveth in the City of Kishkumen to look within themselves and examine their hearts. For who of you declareth before God that thy heart is pure and ready to meet Him? 
92 Behold, how canst thou say that thou doest good in the sight of the Lord, thou who doest robbery? And how canst thou declare that thou art worthy, thou who beatest a man for his coat and his goods? Whoso among you counteth himself righteous who stealeth his neighbor’s house. 
93 But this is not all, thou nest of vipers! Thus doth the Lord thy God say unto all this city: 
94 Repent speedily all you who live in this city! For an hour of tribulation cometh upon all who live in this land. Yea, unto some cities it is given that the earth riseth up and covereth them. And unto others it is given and decreed that, where they did inhabit a valley, a mountain riseth up in the stead thereof. And unto still others the sea riseth up by the decree of the great God and consumeth the inhabitants thereof, even every one. Yea, this is the decree that I have set in the heavens, and I excuse not Myself. 
95 But behold, against all ye citizens of Kishkumen, I have decreed a decree in My wrath concerning you that surpasseth all that shall come to pass unto the cities of the Land Southward. Yea, it shall be unto thee, Oh City of vipers, as it shall be even unto all the cities that casteth out My prophets and spitteth upon them, and smiteth them, yea, and doeth whatsoever they will with them. Yea, I declare unto thee, Kishkumen, it shall be unto thee as it shall be unto the Cities of Laman, Josh, and Gad. 
96 Thou shalt perish with fire, even all thy houses and thy towers. Thy streets and thy byways shall melt with heat, and thy fair gardens shall be a parchment. Thy fountains shall burst and become a choking vapor, and thy storehouses shall become a furnace. And all thy inhabitants shall run to and fro, but every one shall burn with fire and become a stubble. Yea, not one of thy people shall escape thy secret place, for a fire shall come down upon thee that none shall escape. Yea, all thy goods and substance shall become ash and thy wine a poisonous vapor. Thy courtyards and plazas, rich with fruit of every kind, shall blow away upon a scorching wind. Thy paths and pleasant walkways shall be molten. 
97 Can any escape My wrath? I say unto thee, Nay. For, should there be any without thee, having not yet entered into thy secret path which leadeth up unto thy open gates, they shall choke with the fumes that shall issue forth out of thee. Yea, thou shalt inhale the sweet air of the valley and exhale the noxious and poisonous fumes of the death. And behold, all who are caught by that breath, shall fall by the wayside and shrivel up. 
98 Behold, this is the decree which I have decreed in My wrath against thee, Kishkumen. Wherefore, it were good that all thy children should flee from thy bosom, oh mother of harlots! For, thou shalt no longer have whereby they might suck at thy breast, being withered and burned. And all thy teaching shall go down into the earth, molten. Yea, all thy iniquity shall fly up into the air as ash and be dispersed. 
99 Yea, and give ear all the ends of the earth and let this be as a sign unto you. For, if any city in this land doth ever again issue forth progeny born of filth and fornication, of lyings and cheatings, of murder and mayhem, it shall bring a similar ruin upon the land. Yea, and if any nation in this fair land shall labor to produce again a vomitous issue, such as thou, Kishkumen, thou ravenous beast, hast done unto this nation, behold, and the people do nothing to prevent it, there shall come upon that nation a like calamity. 
100 Behold, and it shall be as if a smoke and a fire of destruction cometh down upon them from heaven that none stayeth. For, show Me the hand that contesteth against the Lord and prevaileth. Yea, show Me the sword that contendeth against the Lord God! For My word is as a two edged sword that parteth the sinew and spilleth out all wickedness upon the ground. Think not to contend against the Lord thy God, but labor to appease My wrath before the day of its fullness. For behold, I am patient with longsuffering. But, when My wrath is kindled against the wicked, none can stay. Nay, though thou riseth up even unto Me in the end, oh man, with prayings and entreaty, when My wrath is full, My ears are shut. 
101 Wherefore, repent all ye who inhabit this evil place and flee even out of it while the day remaineth wherein you might make your flight. For behold, there be but a narrow way in which to escape and but a short time left to affect it. And, when the calamity is upon you, there remaineth no room for you to escape and you shall all die in your retreat. Yea, your bodies shall heap up upon your secret way and your hidden city shall no longer be a safety for you. Repent ye, and remove hastily from this place of horror. 
102 And after this manner did San preach the words of Christ’s warning unto the people of the City of Kishkumen. Yea, for three days did he repeat the words which the Lord had given him to speak and he moved not from upon the embankment in all that time, but continually preached the warning of the Lord unto the people. 
103 And behold, there were some who did heed the words of the prophet, but these were exceedingly few. But the rest of the inhabitants did pass by him winking and scorning his words. For, they believed him to be a madman, and they gave him no heed at all. 
104 Wherefore, at the end of three days, the Lord did command San to depart from the midst of the city and he did as the Lord commanded. And behold, Korim did go with him and support him in all that he did and said. 
105 And, when they had traveled two days out of the City of Kishkumen, they met again their companions who had camped along the way. And behold, a great multitude had gathered unto them from out of all the places whereunto they had gone to preach. And they were found teaching and instructing the people in all that they should do to please the Lord. 
106 And, when they were seen of them, even from within the camp, the brethren of San came out to greet them, and they fell upon them and kissed them. 
107 For, the Lord had also visited them and told them all that He desired them to declare unto the people of Kishkumen, and they feared for them. Nevertheless, the Lord had comforted them in their fear and they prayed all the day long that they would once again see the face of their brother. Wherefore, they did feel blessed and thankful upon seeing them from away off approaching the camp, and they did run out to meet San and Korim upon the road. 
108 And when they had recounted unto each other all that had transpired, they determined that the day of which the Lord had spoken must be near indeed. And, giving instruction unto all the people that they nurture and succor each other, they struck their camp and made ready to return even unto the Land Northward. 
109 But behold, many of the multitude did also desire that which the seven companions of San had desired of them. Yea, they desired to repent and purify themselves before God and make a strait way before the Lord. Wherefore, the brethren of Oug bid all that would follow them out of the land to follow them, that they might come into the Land Northward and become Nem. And the people rejoiced and declared that this was the desire of their hearts. And the number of them were fifty and two men and seventeen women and twelve little children. 
110 And behold, the brethren of Oug and Himneth did baptize them in water and gave them the gift of the Holy Ghost to guide them. And they instructed them in all the ways of the Nem and exhorted them to lift each other up and support each other and not murmur against each other when the way became hard before them. 
111 For behold, they knew that they could not get home following the way they had come, for they were become a large party and there would be no boats to take them back the way they had come. And they knew also that they might be forced to traverse the Land of Desolation even on foot in order to reach the borders of the Land Northward. Wherefore, they instructed all the people to have patience and charity one for another, for they knew the way would be hard. 


CHAPTER 8 
1 And the band traveled far and they did work to get their provender in every city they met upon the way. And they did preach the Gospel of Jesus unto all the people. And behold, they never again found people so hardened as they had theretofore, and the Lord blessed them in their journey. 
2 But behold, ere they had traveled the half of the Land Southward in their progress toward their own country, and they were on the road between the City of Moroni and the City of Moronihah, a great tumult shook the land, insomuch that none could hold their footing. And behold, they did all fall to the ground. Yea, they did embrace the ground and lift up their prayers for their salvation unto the Lord. 
3 And they could see afar off that the great City of Moroni was swallowed by the sea, and the sea rose up in many places and cut off the way before them. Yea, and in the stead of land before them, there formed many seas, both great and small, and many lakes, and the place where they had fallen down upon the ground became an island of the sea. 
4 And behold, ere they could begin again their journey, the sky blackened and the air thickened, and they heard as the sound of continuous thunderings from the West. Yea, before the first day of the calamity had ended, none could see even the hand held up in front of their eyes and the air was thick with vapor. And they all feared for their lives, but, the children of Sanempet led them in mighty prayer and the Lord preserved them. And thus they stood still for the space of three days. 
5 And, when the three days were come to an end, they did break the last of their bread together and blessed it unto the Lord. And they did pour out the last of their wine together and blessed it unto the Lord, for, thus did the Spirit whisper to them that they ought to do. And behold, they did share this last meal one with another, believing that, perhaps, they would perish upon this tiny island. 
6 But, they did hear the voice of the Lord descending out of heaven, and even they did see Him afar off, and they were comforted and continued in prayer and supplication before the Lord. And behold, after they had passed one day in prayer and supplication, a small body of men hailed them from the shore afar off to the west. And they beheld that the waters had receded somewhat, insofar that they were all able to walk to the other shore. 
7 And the men that greeted them told them that the Lord commanded that all should hastily be gathered in unto the temple in the Land Bountiful, which lay to the west of where they stood, and that they should hasten even there to meet the Lord and His servants. 
8 But behold, the children knew that the distance was far, even many days or even weeks through the wilderness and they could not reach the place on foot. Wherefore, they sought the guidance of the Spirit in the thing. 
9 Wherefore behold, a strange and a mighty miracle took place unto the children of Sanempet and unto all them that did follow them. Behold, the Spirit came upon them mightily as they prayed, and they were surrounded about by angels. And behold, they were carried as if upon the wind even unto a place that was near unto the City of Bountiful. 
10 And they did walk into the city to the place round about the temple, and behold, there was a great multitude gathered there all about the temple. And, as they approached, behold, they saw the Lord descending upon the steps of the temple. And they cast themselves upon the ground as did all the people and rejoiced before their God. 
11 Now therefore, we do see that the children of Sanempet and their companions were with the Lord when He did make His visitation to the people who had survived the great calamities that had befallen the Land Southward. And behold, they were the only people of all the people who inhabited the more easterly regions of the Land Southward who survived the great destruction. And they were ministered unto by the Lord and by angels, and also by the Twelve whom the Lord had called. 
12 Now, the account of His visit to the Land Southward is written in another place, but we do know of it of a surety because of the testimony of the children of Sanempet and of all that followed them back into the Land Northward. But behold, we do also know of it because of the little book that was carried back even unto Oug with the party. For, Timothy, one of the Twelve whom Jesus chose, did also travel with them. And this is all recorded in another place. 
13 And it was as Jesus said unto Oug, that his brethren were safe and that they were upon the road traveling unto their home, even at the moment that Jesus did make His visitation unto the Nem of Mentina. And all this is also recorded in another place. 
14 Sufficeth to say that the children of Sanempet did fulfill the mission upon which the Lord had sent them. Yea, they did go even unto the most wicked of the cities of the Land Southward and they did testify against them. And all that they did testify would befall those wicked cities did verily come to pass. Of all this we have ample proof and witness in the writings of our people. Wherefore, I, Pa Nat, do make an end of my abridgement of the missions of the children of Sanempet.
________________




THE FIRST BOOK OF MORONI 
THE SON OF MORMON, 
WHO ABRIDGED THE NEPHITE RECORD 


The revelations and words of the Prophet Moroni, the son of Mormon, as found in the Nephite Record known as the Book of Mormon, while traveling through the Land Southward and the Land Northward during the Great War between the Lamanites and the Nephites. 
CHAPTER 1 
The words of Moroni, as recorded in Chapter 8 of his father’s record, the Book of Mormon, which is found in the record of the Nephites. 
1 Behold I, Moroni, do finish the record of my father, Mormon. Behold, I have but few things to write, which things I have been commanded by my father. 
2 And now it came to pass that after the great and tremendous battle at Cumorah, behold, the Nephites who had escaped into the country southward were hunted by the Lamanites, until they were all destroyed. 
3 And my father also was killed by them, and I even remain alone to write the sad tale of the destruction of my people. But behold, they are gone, and I fulfil the commandment of my father. And whether they will slay me, I know not. 
4 Therefore I will write and hide up the records in the earth; and whither I go it mattereth not. 
5 Behold, my father hath made this record, and he hath written the intent thereof. And behold, I would write it also if I had room upon the plates, but I have not; and ore I have none, for I am alone. My father hath been slain in battle, and all my kinsfolk, and I have not friends nor whither to go; and how long the Lord will suffer that I may live I know not. 
6 Behold, four hundred years have passed away since the coming of our Lord and Savior. 
7 And behold, the Lamanites have hunted my people, the Nephites, down from city to city and from place to place, even until they are no more; and great has been their fall; yea, great and marvelous is the destruction of my people, the Nephites. 
8 And behold, it is the hand of the Lord which hath done it. And behold also, the Lamanites are at war one with another; and the whole face of this land is one continual round of murder and bloodshed; and no one knoweth the end of the war. 
9 And now, behold, I say no more concerning them, for there are none save it be the Lamanites and robbers that do exist upon the face of the land. 
10 And there are none that do know the true God save it be the disciples of Jesus, who did tarry in the land until the wickedness of the people was so great that the Lord would not suffer them to remain with the people; and whether they be upon the face of the land no man knoweth. 
11 But behold, my father and I have seen them, and they have ministered unto us. 
12 And whoso receiveth this record, and shall not condemn it because of the imperfections which are in it, the same shall know of greater things than these. Behold, I am Moroni; and were it possible, I would make all things known unto you. 
13 Behold, I make an end of speaking concerning this people. I am the son of Mormon, and my father was a descendant of Nephi. 
14 And I am the same who hideth up this record unto the Lord; the plates thereof are of no worth, because of the commandment of the Lord. For he truly saith that no one shall have them to get gain; but the record thereof is of great worth; and whoso shall bring it to light, him will the Lord bless. 
15 For none can have power to bring it to light save it be given him of God; for God wills that it shall be done with an eye single to his glory, or the welfare of the ancient and long dispersed covenant people of the Lord. 
16 And blessed be he that shall bring this thing to light; for it shall be brought out of darkness unto light, according to the word of God; yea, it shall be brought out of the earth, and it shall shine forth out of darkness, and come unto the knowledge of the people; and it shall be done by the power of God. 
17 And if there be faults they be the faults of a man. But behold, we know no fault; nevertheless God knoweth all things; therefore, he that condemneth, let him be aware lest he shall be in danger of hell fire. 
18 And he that saith: Show unto me, or ye shall be smitten—let him beware lest he commandeth that which is forbidden of the Lord. 
19 For behold, the same that judgeth rashly shall be judged rashly again; for according to his works shall his wages be; therefore, he that smiteth shall be smitten again, of the Lord. 
20 Behold what the scripture says—man shall not smite, neither shall he judge; for judgment is mine, saith the Lord, and vengeance is mine also, and I will repay. 
21 And he that shall breathe out wrath and strifes against the work of the Lord, and against the covenant people of the Lord who are the house of Israel, and shall say: We will destroy the work of the Lord, and the Lord will not remember his covenant which he hath made unto the house of Israel—the same is in danger to be hewn down and cast into the fire; 
22 For the eternal purposes of the Lord shall roll on, until all his promises shall be fulfilled. 
23 Search the prophecies of Isaiah. Behold, I cannot write them. Yea, behold I say unto you, that those saints who have gone before me, who have possessed this land, shall cry, yea, even from the dust will they cry unto the Lord; and as the Lord liveth he will remember the covenant which he hath made with them. 
24 And he knoweth their prayers, that they were in behalf of their brethren. And he knoweth their faith, for in his name could they remove mountains; and in his name could they cause the earth to shake; and by the power of his word did they cause prisons to tumble to the earth; yea, even the fiery furnace could not harm them, neither wild beasts nor poisonous serpents, because of the power of his word. 
25 And behold, their prayers were also in behalf of him that the Lord should suffer to bring these things forth. 
26 And no one need say they shall not come, for they surely shall, for the Lord hath spoken it; for out of the earth shall they come, by the hand of the Lord, and none can stay it; and it shall come in a day when it shall be said that miracles are done away; and it shall come even as if one should speak from the dead. 
27 And it shall come in a day when the blood of saints shall cry unto the Lord, because of secret combinations and the works of darkness. 
28 Yea, it shall come in a day when the power of God shall be denied, and churches become defiled and be lifted up in the pride of their hearts; yea, even in a day when leaders of churches and teachers shall rise in the pride of their hearts, even to the envying of them who belong to their churches. 
29 Yea, it shall come in a day when there shall be heard of fires, and tempests, and vapors of smoke in foreign lands; 
30 And there shall also be heard of wars, rumors of wars, and earthquakes in divers places. 
31 Yea, it shall come in a day when there shall be great pollutions upon the face of the earth; there shall be murders, and robbing, and lying, and deceivings, and whoredoms, and all manner of abominations; when there shall be many who will say, Do this, or do that, and it mattereth not, for the Lord will uphold such at the last day. But wo unto such, for they are in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity. 
32 Yea, it shall come in a day when there shall be churches built up that shall say: Come unto me, and for your money you shall be forgiven of your sins. 
33 O ye wicked and perverse and stiffnecked people, why have ye built up churches unto yourselves to get gain? Why have ye transfigured the holy word of God, that ye might bring damnation upon your souls? Behold, look ye unto the revelations of God; for behold, the time cometh at that day when all these things must be fulfilled. 
34 Behold, the Lord hath shown unto me great and marvelous things concerning that which must shortly come, at that day when these things shall come forth among you. 
35 Behold, I speak unto you as if ye were present, and yet ye are not. But behold, Jesus Christ hath shown you unto me, and I know your doing. 
36 And I know that ye do walk in the pride of your hearts; and there are none save a few only who do not lift themselves up in the pride of their hearts, unto the wearing of very fine apparel, unto envying, and strifes, and malice, and persecutions, and all manner of iniquities; and your churches, yea, even every one, have become polluted because of the pride of your hearts. 
37 For behold, ye do love money, and your substance, and your fine apparel, and the adorning of your churches, more than ye love the poor and the needy, the sick and the afflicted. 
38 O ye pollutions, ye hypocrites, ye teachers, who sell yourselves for that which will canker, why have ye polluted the holy church of God? Why are ye ashamed to take upon you the name of Christ? Why do ye not think that greater is the value of an endless happiness than that misery which never dies—because of the praise of the world? 
39 Why do ye adorn yourselves with that which hath no life, and yet suffer the hungry, and the needy, and the naked, and the sick and the afflicted to pass by you, and notice them not? 
40 Yea, why do ye build up your secret abominations to get gain, and cause that widows should mourn before the Lord, and also orphans to mourn before the Lord, and also the blood of their fathers and their husbands to cry unto the Lord from the ground, for vengeance upon your heads? 
41 Behold, the sword of vengeance hangeth over you; and the time soon cometh that he avengeth the blood of the saints upon you, for he will not suffer their cries any longer. 


CHAPTER 2 
The words of Moroni, as recorded in Chapter 9 of his father’s record, the Book of Mormon, which is found in the record of the Nephites. 
1 And now, I speak also concerning those who do not believe in Christ. 
2 Behold, will ye believe in the day of your visitation—behold, when the Lord shall come, yea, even that great day when the earth shall be rolled together as a scroll, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, yea, in that great day when ye shall be brought to stand before the Lamb of God—then will ye say that there is no God? 
3 Then will ye longer deny the Christ, or can ye behold the Lamb of God? Do ye suppose that ye shall dwell with him under a consciousness of your guilt? Do ye suppose that ye could be happy to dwell with that holy Being, when your souls are racked with a consciousness of guilt that ye have ever abused his laws? 
4 Behold, I say unto you that ye would be more miserable to dwell with a holy and just God, under a consciousness of your filthiness before him, than ye would to dwell with the damned souls in hell. 
5 For behold, when ye shall be brought to see your nakedness before God, and also the glory of God, and the holiness of Jesus Christ, it will kindle a flame of unquenchable fire upon you. 
6 O then ye unbelieving, turn ye unto the Lord; cry mightily unto the Father in the name of Jesus, that perhaps ye may be found spotless, pure, fair, and white, having been cleansed by the blood of the Lamb, at that great and last day. 
7 And again I speak unto you who deny the revelations of God, and say that they are done away, that there are no revelations, nor prophecies, nor gifts, nor healing, nor speaking with tongues, and the interpretation of tongues; 
8 Behold I say unto you, he that denieth these things knoweth not the gospel of Christ; yea, he has not read the scriptures; if so, he does not understand them. 
9 For do we not read that God is the same yesterday, today, and forever, and in him there is no variableness neither shadow of changing? 
10 And now, if ye have imagined up unto yourselves a god who doth vary, and in whom there is shadow of changing, then have ye imagined up unto yourselves a god who is not a God of miracles. 
11 But behold, I will show unto you a God of miracles, even the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; and it is that same God who created the heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are. 
12 Behold, he created Adam, and by Adam came the fall of man. And because of the fall of man came Jesus Christ, even the Father and the Son; and because of Jesus Christ came the redemption of man. 
13 And because of the redemption of man, which came by Jesus Christ, they are brought back into the presence of the Lord; yea, this is wherein all men are redeemed, because the death of Christ bringeth to pass the resurrection, which bringeth to pass a redemption from an endless sleep, from which sleep all men shall be awakened by the power of God when the trump shall sound; and they shall come forth, both small and great, and all shall stand before his bar, being redeemed and loosed from this eternal band of death, which death is a temporal death. 
14 And then cometh the judgment of the Holy One upon them; and then cometh the time that he that is filthy shall be filthy still; and he that is righteous shall be righteous still; he that is happy shall be happy still; and he that is unhappy shall be unhappy still. 
15 And now, O all ye that have imagined up unto yourselves a god who can do no miracles, I would ask of you, have all these things passed, of which I have spoken? Has the end come yet? Behold I say unto you, Nay; and God has not ceased to be a God of miracles. 
16 Behold, are not the things that God hath wrought marvelous in our eyes? Yea, and who can comprehend the marvelous works of God? 
17 Who shall say that it was not a miracle that by his word the heaven and the earth should be; and by the power of his word man was created of the dust of the earth; and by the power of his word have miracles been wrought? 
18 And who shall say that Jesus Christ did not do many mighty miracles? And there were many mighty miracles wrought by the hands of the apostles. 
19 And if there were miracles wrought then, why has God ceased to be a God of miracles and yet be an unchangeable Being? And behold, I say unto you he changeth not; if so he would cease to be God; and he ceaseth not to be God, and is a God of miracles. 
20 And the reason why he ceaseth to do miracles among the children of men is because that they dwindle in unbelief, and depart from the right way, and know not the God in whom they should trust. 
21 Behold, I say unto you that whoso believeth in Christ, doubting nothing, whatsoever he shall ask the Father in the name of Christ it shall be granted him; and this promise is unto all, even unto the ends of the earth. 
22 For behold, thus said Jesus Christ, the Son of God, unto his disciples who should tarry, yea, and also to all his disciples, in the hearing of the multitude: Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature; 
23 And he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved, but he that believeth not shall be damned; 
24 And these signs shall follow them that believe—in my name shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick and they shall recover; 
25 And whosoever shall believe in my name, doubting nothing, unto him will I confirm all my words, even unto the ends of the earth. 
26 And now, behold, who can stand against the works of the Lord? Who can deny his sayings? Who will rise up against the almighty power of the Lord? Who will despise the works of the Lord? Who will despise the children of Christ? Behold, all ye who are despisers of the works of the Lord, for ye shall wonder and perish. 
27 O then despise not, and wonder not, but hearken unto the words of the Lord, and ask the Father in the name of Jesus for what things soever ye shall stand in need. Doubt not, but be believing, and begin as in times of old, and come unto the Lord with all your heart, and work out your own salvation with fear and trembling before him. 
28 Be wise in the days of your probation; strip yourselves of all uncleanness; ask not, that ye may consume it on your lusts, but ask with a firmness unshaken, that ye will yield to no temptation, but that ye will serve the true and living God. 
29 See that ye are not baptized unworthily; see that ye partake not of the sacrament of Christ unworthily; but see that ye do all things in worthiness, and do it in the name of Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God; and if ye do this, and endure to the end, ye will in nowise be cast out. 
30 Behold, I speak unto you as though I spake from the dead; for I know that ye shall have my words. 
31 Condemn me not because of mine imperfection, neither my father, because of his imperfection, neither them who have written before him; but rather give thanks unto God that he hath made manifest unto you our imperfections, that ye may learn to be more wise than we have been. 
32 And now, behold, we have written this record according to our knowledge, in the characters which are called among us the reformed Egyptian, being handed down and altered by us, according to our manner of speech. 
33 And if our plates had been sufficiently large we should have written in Hebrew; but the Hebrew hath been altered by us also; and if we could have written in Hebrew, behold, ye would have had no imperfection in our record. 
34 But the Lord knoweth the things which we have written, and also that none other people knoweth our language; and because that none other people knoweth our language, therefore he hath prepared means for the interpretation thereof. 
35 And these things are written that we may rid our garments of the blood of our brethren, who have dwindled in unbelief. 
36 And behold, these things which we have desired concerning our brethren, yea, even their restoration to the knowledge of Christ, are according to the prayers of all the saints who have dwelt in the land. 
37 And may the Lord Jesus Christ grant that their prayers may be answered according to their faith; and may God the Father remember the covenant which he hath made with the house of Israel; and may he bless them forever, through faith on the name of Jesus Christ. Amen. 


CHAPTER 3 
The words of Moroni, as recorded in the beginning of Chapter 1 of the Book of Ether, which is found in the record of the Nephites. 
1 And now I, Moroni, proceed to give an account of those ancient inhabitants who were destroyed by the hand of the Lord upon the face of this north country. 
2 And I take mine account from the twenty and four plates which were found by the people of Limhi, which is called the Book of Ether. 
3 And as I suppose that the first part of this record, which speaks concerning the creation of the world, and also of Adam, and an account from that time even to the great tower, and whatsoever things transpired among the children of men until that time, is had among the Jews— 
4 Therefore I do not write those things which transpired from the days of Adam until that time; but they are had upon the plates; and whoso findeth them, the same will have power that he may get the full account. 
5 But behold, I give not the full account, but a part of the account I give, from the tower down until they were destroyed. 
6 And on this wise do I give the account. 
This account can be found in the Book of Ether in The Book or Mormon. 


CHAPTER 4 
The words of Moroni, as recorded in Chapter 4 of the Book of Ether, which is found in the record of the Nephites. 
1 And the Lord commanded the Brother of Jared to go down out of the mount from the presence of the Lord, and write the things which he had seen; and they were forbidden to come unto the children of men until after that he should be lifted up upon the cross; and for this cause did king Mosiah keep them, that they should not come unto the world until after Christ should show himself unto his people. 
2 And after Christ truly had showed himself unto his people he commanded that they should be made manifest. 
3 And now, after that, they have all dwindled in unbelief; and there is none save it be the Lamanites, and they have rejected the gospel of Christ; therefore I am commanded that I should hide them up again in the earth. 
4 Behold, I have written upon these plates the very things which the Brother of Jared saw; and there never were greater things made manifest than those which were made manifest unto the Brother of Jared. 
5 Wherefore the Lord hath commanded me to write them; and I have written them. And he commanded me that I should seal them up; and he also hath commanded that I should seal up the interpretation thereof; wherefore I have sealed up the interpreters, according to the commandment of the Lord. 
6 For the Lord said unto me: They shall not go forth unto the Gentiles until the day that they shall repent of their iniquity, and become clean before the Lord. 
7 And in that day that they shall exercise faith in me, saith the Lord, even as the Brother of Jared did, that they may become sanctified in me, then will I manifest unto them the things which the Brother of Jared saw, even to the unfolding unto them all my revelations, saith Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of the heavens and of the earth, and all things that in them are. 
8 And he that will contend against the word of the Lord, let him be accursed; and he that shall deny these things, let him be accursed; for unto them will I show no greater things, saith Jesus Christ; for I am he who speaketh. 
9 And at my command the heavens are opened and are shut; and at my word the earth shall shake; and at my command the inhabitants thereof shall pass away, even so as by fire. 
10 And he that believeth not my words believeth not my disciples; and if it so be that I do not speak, judge ye; for ye shall know that it is I that speaketh, at the last day. 
11 But he that believeth these things which I have spoken, him will I visit with the manifestations of my Spirit, and he shall know and bear record. For because of my Spirit he shall know that these things are true; for it persuadeth men to do good. 
12 And whatsoever thing persuadeth men to do good is of me; for good cometh of none save it be of me. I am the same that leadeth men to all good; he that will not believe my words will not believe me—that I am; and he that will not believe me will not believe the Father who sent me. For behold, I am the Father, I am the light, and the life, and the truth of the world. 
13 Come unto me, O ye Gentiles, and I will show unto you the greater things, the knowledge which is hid up because of unbelief. 
14 Come unto me, O ye house of Israel, and it shall be made manifest unto you how great things the Father hath laid up for you, from the foundation of the world; and it hath not come unto you, because of unbelief. 
15 Behold, when ye shall rend that veil of unbelief which doth cause you to remain in your awful state of wickedness, and hardness of heart, and blindness of mind, then shall the great and marvelous things which have been hid up from the foundation of the world from you—yea, when ye shall call upon the Father in my name, with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, then shall ye know that the Father hath remembered the covenant which he made unto your fathers, O house of Israel. 
16 And then shall my revelations which I have caused to be written by my servant John be unfolded in the eyes of all the people. Remember, when ye see these things, ye shall know that the time is at hand that they shall be made manifest in very deed. 
17 Therefore, when ye shall receive this record ye may know that the work of the Father has commenced upon all the face of the land. 
18 Therefore, repent all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me, and believe in my gospel, and be baptized in my name; for he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned; and signs shall follow them that believe in my name. 
19 And blessed is he that is found faithful unto my name at the last day, for he shall be lifted up to dwell in the kingdom prepared for him from the foundation of the world. And behold it is I that hath spoken it. Amen. 


CHAPTER 5 
The words of Moroni, as recorded in Chapter 5 of the Book of Ether, which is found in the record of the Nephites. 
1 And now I, Moroni, have written the words which were commanded me, according to my memory; and I have told you the things which I have sealed up; therefore touch them not in order that ye may translate; for that thing is forbidden you, except by and by it shall be wisdom in God. 
2 And behold, ye may be privileged that ye may show the plates unto those who shall assist to bring forth this work; 
3 And unto three shall they be shown by the power of God; wherefore they shall know of a surety that these things are true. 
4 And in the mouth of three witnesses shall these things be established; and the testimony of three, and this work, in the which shall be shown forth the power of God and also his word, of which the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost bear record—and all this shall stand as a testimony against the world at the last day. 
5 And if it so be that they repent and come unto the Father in the name of Jesus, they shall be received into the kingdom of God. 
6 And now, if I have no authority for these things, judge ye; for ye shall know that I have authority when ye shall see me, and we shall stand before God at the last day. Amen. 


CHAPTER 6 
The words of Moroni, as recorded in Chapter 12 of the Book of Ether, which is found in the record of the Nephites. 
1 And it came to pass that the days of Ether were in the days of Coriantumr; and Coriantumr was king over all the land. 
2 And Ether was a prophet of the Lord; wherefore Ether came forth in the days of Coriantumr, and began to prophesy unto the people, for he could not be restrained because of the Spirit of the Lord which was in him. 
3 For he did cry from the morning, even until the going down of the sun, exhorting the people to believe in God unto repentance lest they should be destroyed, saying unto them that by faith all things are fulfilled— 
4 Wherefore, whoso believeth in God might with surety hope for a better world, yea, even a place at the right hand of God, which hope cometh of faith, maketh an anchor to the souls of men, which would make them sure and steadfast, always abounding in good works, being led to glorify God. 
5 And it came to pass that Ether did prophesy great and marvelous things unto the people, which they did not believe, because they saw them not. 
6 And now, I, Moroni, would speak somewhat concerning these things; I would show unto the world that faith is things which are hoped for and not seen; wherefore, dispute not because ye see not, for ye receive no witness until after the trial of your faith. 
7 For it was by faith that Christ showed himself unto our fathers, after he had risen from the dead; and he showed not himself unto them until after they had faith in him; wherefore, it must needs be that some had faith in him, for he showed himself not unto the world. 
8 But because of the faith of men he has shown himself unto the world, and glorified the name of the Father, and prepared a way that thereby others might be partakers of the heavenly gift, that they might hope for those things which they have not seen. 
9 Wherefore, ye may also have hope, and be partakers of the gift, if ye will but have faith. 
10 Behold it was by faith that they of old were called after the holy order of God. 
11 Wherefore, by faith was the law of Moses given. But in the gift of his Son hath God prepared a more excellent way; and it is by faith that it hath been fulfilled. 
12 For if there be no faith among the children of men God can do no miracle among them; wherefore, he showed not himself until after their faith. 
13 Behold, it was the faith of Alma and Amulek that caused the prison to tumble to the earth. 
14 Behold, it was the faith of Nephi and Lehi that wrought the change upon the Lamanites, that they were baptized with fire and with the Holy Ghost. 
15 Behold, it was the faith of Ammon and his brethren which wrought so great a miracle among the Lamanites. 
16 Yea, and even all they who wrought miracles wrought them by faith, even those who were before Christ and also those who were after. 
17 And it was by faith that the three disciples obtained a promise that they should not taste of death; and they obtained not the promise until after their faith. 
18 And neither at any time hath any wrought miracles until after their faith; wherefore they first believed in the Son of God. 
19 And there were many whose faith was so exceedingly strong, even before Christ came, who could not be kept from within the veil, but truly saw with their eyes the things which they had beheld with an eye of faith, and they were glad. 
20 And behold, we have seen in this record that one of these was the Brother of Jared; for so great was his faith in God, that when God put forth his finger he could not hide it from the sight of the Brother of Jared, because of his word which he had spoken unto him, which word he had obtained by faith. 
21 And after the Brother of Jared had beheld the finger of the Lord, because of the promise which the Brother of Jared had obtained by faith, the Lord could not withhold anything from his sight; wherefore he showed him all things, for he could no longer be kept without the veil. 
22 And it is by faith that my fathers have obtained the promise that these things should come unto their brethren through the Gentiles; therefore the Lord hath commanded me, yea, even Jesus Christ. 
23 And I said unto him: Lord, the Gentiles will mock at these things, because of our weakness in writing; for Lord thou hast made us mighty in word by faith, but thou hast not made us mighty in writing; for thou hast made all this people that they could speak much, because of the Holy Ghost which thou hast given them; 
24 And thou hast made us that we could write but little, because of the awkwardness of our hands. Behold, thou hast not made us mighty in writing like unto the Brother of Jared, for thou madest him that the things which he wrote were mighty even as thou art, unto the overpowering of man to read them. 
25 Thou hast also made our words powerful and great, even that we cannot write them; wherefore, when we write we behold our weakness, and stumble because of the placing of our words; and I fear lest the Gentiles shall mock at our words. 
26 And when I had said this, the Lord spake unto me, saying: Fools mock, but they shall mourn; and my grace is sufficient for the meek, that they shall take no advantage of your weakness; 
27 And if men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them. 
28 Behold, I will show unto the Gentiles their weakness, and I will show unto them that faith, hope and charity bringeth unto me—the fountain of all righteousness. 
29 And I, Moroni, having heard these words, was comforted, and said: O Lord, thy righteous will be done, for I know that thou workest unto the children of men according to their faith; 
30 For the Brother of Jared said unto the mountain Zerin, Remove—and it was removed. And if he had not had faith it would not have moved; wherefore thou workest after men have faith. 
31 For thus didst thou manifest thyself unto thy disciples; for after they had faith, and did speak in thy name, thou didst show thyself unto them in great power. 
32 And I also remember that thou hast said that thou hast prepared a house for man, yea, even among the mansions of thy Father, in which man might have a more excellent hope; wherefore man must hop, or he cannot receive an inheritance in the place which thou hast prepared. 
33 And again, I remember that thou hast said that thou hast loved the world, even unto the laying down of thy life for the world, that thou mightest take it again to prepare a place for the children of men. 
34 And now I know that this love which thou hast had for the children of men is charity; wherefore, except men shall have charity they cannot inherit that place which thou hast prepared in the mansions of thy Father. 
35 Wherefore, I know by this thing which thou hast said, that if the Gentiles have not charity, because of our weakness, that thou wilt prove them, and take away their talent, yea, even that which they have received, and give unto them who shall have more abundantly. 
36 And it came to pass that I prayed unto the Lord that he would give unto the Gentiles grace, that they might have charity. 
37 And it came to pass that the Lord said unto me: If they have not charity it mattereth not unto thee, thou hast been faithful; wherefore, thy garments shall be made clean. And because thou hast seen thy weakness thou shalt be made strong, even unto the sitting down in the place which I have prepared in the mansions of my Father. 
38 And now I, Moroni, bid farewell unto the Gentiles, yea, and also unto my brethren whom I love, until we shall meet before the judgment-seat of Christ, where all men shall know that my garments are not spotted with your blood. 
39 And then shall ye know that I have seen Jesus, and that he hath talked with me face to face, and that he told me in plain humility, even as a man telleth another in mine own language, concerning these things; 
40 And only a few have I written, because of my weakness in writing. 
41 And now, I would commend you to seek this Jesus of whom the prophets and apostles have written, that the grace of God the Father, and also the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost, which beareth record of them, may be and abide in you forever. Amen.
________________




THE SECOND BOOK OF MORONI 
THE SON OF MORMON, 
WHO ABRIDGED THE NEPHITE RECORD 
The words of Moroni, as recorded in Chapters 1-10 of the Book of Moroni, which is found in the record of the Nephites. 
CHAPTER 1 
Moroni writes for the benefit of the Lamanites—The Nephites who will not deny Christ are put to death. 
1 Now I, Moroni, after having made an end of abridging the account of the people of Jared, I had supposed not to have written more, but I have not as yet perished; and I make not myself known to the Lamanites, lest they should destroy me. 
2 For behold, their wars are exceedingly fierce among themselves; and because of their hatred they put to death every Nephite that will not deny the Christ. 
3 And I, Moroni, will not deny the Christ; wherefore, I wander whithersoever I can for the safety of mine own life. 
4 Wherefore, I write a few more things, contrary to that which I had supposed; for I had supposed not to have written any more; but I write a few more things, that perhaps they may be of worth unto my brethren, the Lamanites, in some future day, according to the will of the Lord. 


CHAPTER 2 
Jesus gave the twelve Nephite disciples power to confer the gift of the Holy Ghost. 
1 The words of Christ, which he spake unto his disciples, the twelve whom he had chosen, as he laid his hands upon them— 
2 And he called them by name, saying: Ye shall call on the Father in my name, in mighty prayer; and after ye have done this ye shall have power that to him upon whom ye shall lay your hands, ye shall give the Holy Ghost; and in my name shall ye give it, for thus do mine apostles. 
3 Now Christ spake these words unto them at the time of his first appearing; and the multitude heard it not, but the disciples heard it; and on as many as they laid their hands, fell the Holy Ghost. 


CHAPTER 3 
Elders ordain priests and teachers by the laying on of hands.. 
1 The manner which the disciples, who were called the elders of the church, ordained priests and teachers— 
2 After they had prayed unto the Father in the name of Christ, they laid their hands upon them, and said: 
3 In the name of Jesus Christ I ordain you to be a priest (or if he be a teacher, I ordain you to be a teacher) to preach repentance and remission of sins through Jesus Christ, by the endurance of faith on his name to the end. Amen. 
4 And after this manner did they ordain priests and teachers, according to the gifts and callings of God unto men; and they ordained them by the power of the Holy Ghost, which was in them. 


CHAPTER 4 
How Elders and Priests administer the sacramental bread is explained. 
1 The manner of their elders and priests administering the flesh and blood of Christ unto the church; and they administered it according to the commandments of Christ; wherefore we know the manner to be true; and the elder or priest did minister it— 
2 And they did kneel down with the church, and pray to the Father in the name of Christ, saying: 
3 O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ, to bless and sanctify this bread to the souls of all those who partake of it; that they may eat in remembrance of the body of thy Son, and witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father, that they are willing to take upon them the name of thy Son, and always remember him, and keep his commandments which he hath given them, that they may always have his Spirit to be with them. Amen. 


CHAPTER 5 
The mode of administering the sacramental wine is set forth.. 
1 The manner of administering the wine—Behold, they took the cup, and said: 
2 O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee, in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ, to bless and sanctify this wine to the souls of all those who drink of it, that they may do it in remembrance of the blood of thy Son, which was shed for them; that they may witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father, that they do always remember him, that they may have his Spirit to be with them. Amen. 


CHAPTER 6 
Repentant persons are baptized and fellowshipped—Church members who repent are forgiven—Meetings are conducted by the power of the Holy Ghost. 
1 And now I speak concerning baptism. Behold, elders, priests, and teachers were baptized; and they were not baptized save they brought forth fruit meet that they were worthy of it. 
2 Neither did they receive any unto baptism save they came forth with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, and witnessed unto the church that they truly repented of all their sins. 
3 And none were received unto baptism save they took upon them the name of Christ, having a determination to serve him to the end. 
4 And after they had been received unto baptism, and were wrought upon and cleansed by the power of the Holy Ghost, they were numbered among the people of the church of Christ; and their names were taken, that they might be remembered and nourished by the good word of God, to keep them in the right way, to keep them continually watchful unto prayer, relying alone upon the merits of Christ, who was the author and the finisher of their faith. 
5 And the church did meet together oft, to fast and to pray, and to speak one with another concerning the welfare of their souls. 
6 And they did meet together oft to partake of bread and wine, in remembrance of the Lord Jesus. 
7 And they were strict to observe that there should be no iniquity among them; and whoso was found to commit iniquity, and three witnesses of the church did condemn them before the elders, and if they repented not, and confessed not, their names were blotted out, and they were not numbered among the people of Christ. 
8 But as oft as they repented and sought forgiveness, with real intent, they were forgiven. 
9 And their meetings were conducted by the church after the manner of the workings of the Spirit, and by the power of the Holy Ghost; for as the power of the Holy Ghost led them whether to preach, or to exhort, or to pray, or to supplicate, or to sing, even so it was done. 


CHAPTER 7 
An invitation is given to enter into the rest of the Lord—Pray with real intent—The Spirit of Christ enables men to know good from evil—Satan persuades men to deny Christ and do evil—The prophets manifest the coming of Christ—By faith, miracles are wrought and angels minister—Men should hope for eternal life and cleave unto charity. 
1 And now I, Moroni, write a few of the words of my father Mormon, which he spake concerning faith, hope, and charity; for after this manner did he speak unto the people, as he taught them in the synagogue which they had built for the place of worship. 
2 And now I, Mormon, speak unto you, my beloved brethren; and it is by the grace of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, and his holy will, because of the gift of his calling unto me, that I am permitted to speak unto you at this time. 
3 Wherefore, I would speak unto you that are of the church, that are the peaceable followers of Christ, and that have obtained a sufficient hope by which ye can enter into the rest of the Lord, from this time henceforth until ye shall rest with him in heaven. 
4 And now my brethren, I judge these things of you because of your peaceable walk with the children of men. 
5 For I remember the word of God which saith by their works ye shall know them; for if their works be good, then they are good also. 
6 For behold, God hath said a man being evil cannot do that which is good; for if he offereth a gift, or prayeth unto God, except he shall do it with real intent it profiteth him nothing. 
7 For behold, it is not counted unto him for righteousness. 
8 For behold, if a man being evil giveth a gift, he doeth it grudgingly; wherefore it is counted unto him the same as if he had retained the gift; wherefore he is counted evil before God. 
9 And likewise also is it counted evil unto a man, if he shall pray and not with real intent of heart; yea, and it profiteth him nothing, for God receiveth none such. 
10 Wherefore, a man being evil cannot do that which is good; neither will he give a good gift. 
11 For behold, a bitter fountain cannot bring forth good water; neither can a good fountain bring forth bitter water; wherefore, a man being a servant of the devil cannot follow Christ; and if he follow Christ he cannot be a servant of the devil. 
12 Wherefore, all things which are good cometh of God; and that which is evil cometh of the devil; for the devil is an enemy unto God, and fighteth against him continually, and inviteth and enticeth to sin, and to do that which is evil continually. 
13 But behold, that which is of God inviteth and enticeth to do good continually; wherefore, every thing which inviteth and enticeth to do good, and to love God, and to serve him, is inspired of God. 
14 Wherefore, take heed, my beloved brethren, that ye do not judge that which is evil to be of God, or that which is good and of God to be of the devil. 
15 For behold, my brethren, it is given unto you to judge, that ye may know good from evil; and the way to judge is as plain, that ye may know with a perfect knowledge, as the daylight is from the dark night. 
16 For behold, the Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that he may know good from evil; wherefore, I show unto you the way to judge; for every thing which inviteth to do good, and to persuade to believe in Christ, is sent forth by the power and gift of Christ; wherefore ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of God. 
17 But whatsoever thing persuadeth men to do evil, and believe not in Christ, and deny him, and serve not God, then ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of the devil; for after this manner doth the devil work, for he persuadeth no man to do good, no, not one; neither do his angels; neither do they who subject themselves unto him. 
18 And now, my brethren, seeing that ye know the light by which ye may judge, which light is the light of Christ, see that ye do not judge wrongfully; for with that same judgment which ye judge ye shall also be judged. 
19 Wherefore, I beseech of you, brethren, that ye should search diligently in the light of Christ that ye may know good from evil; and if ye will lay hold upon every good thing, and condemn it not, ye certainly will be a child of Christ. 
20 And now, my brethren, how is it possible that ye can lay hold upon every good thing? 
21 And now I come to that faith, of which I said I would speak; and I will tell you the way whereby ye may lay hold on every good thing. 
22 For behold, God knowing all things, being from everlasting to everlasting, behold, he sent angels to minister unto the children of men, to make manifest concerning the coming of Christ; and in Christ there should come every good thing. 
23 And God also declared unto prophets, by his own mouth, that Christ should come. 
24 And behold, there were divers ways that he did manifest things unto the children of men, which were good; and all things which are good cometh of Christ; otherwise men were fallen, and there could no good thing come unto them. 
25 Wherefore, by the ministering of angels, and by every word which proceeded forth out of the mouth of God, men began to exercise faith in Christ; and thus by faith, they did lay hold upon every good thing; and thus it was until the coming of Christ. 
26 And after that he came men also were saved by faith in his name; and by faith, they become the sons of God. And as surely as Christ liveth he spake these words unto our fathers, saying: Whatsoever thing ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is good, in faith believing that ye shall receive, behold, it shall be done unto you. 
27 Wherefore, my beloved brethren, have miracles ceased because Christ hath ascended into heaven, and hath sat down on the right hand of God, to claim of the Father his rights of mercy which he hath upon the children of men? 
28 For he hath answered the ends of the law, and he claimeth all those who have faith in him; and they who have faith in him will cleave unto every good thing; wherefore he advocateth the cause of the children of men; and he dwelleth eternally in the heavens. 
29 And because he hath done this, my beloved brethren, have miracles ceased? Behold I say unto you, Nay; neither have angels ceased to minister unto the children of men. 
30 For behold, they are subject unto him, to minister according to the word of his command, showing themselves unto them of strong faith and a firm mind in every form of godliness. 
31 And the office of their ministry is to call men unto repentance, and to fulfil and to do the work of the covenants of the Father, which he hath made unto the children of men, to prepare the way among the children of men, by declaring the word of Christ unto the chosen vessels of the Lord, that they may bear testimony of him. 
32 And by so doing, the Lord God prepareth the way that the residue of men may have faith in Christ, that the Holy Ghost may have place in their hearts, according to the power thereof; and after this manner bringeth to pass the Father, the covenants which he hath made unto the children of men. 
33 And Christ hath said: If ye will have faith in me ye shall have power to do whatsoever thing is expedient in me. 
34 And he hath said: Repent all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me, and be baptized in my name, and have faith in me, that ye may be saved. 
35 And now, my beloved brethren, if this be the case that these things are true which I have spoken unto you, and God will show unto you, with power and great glory at the last day, that they are true, and if they are true has the day of miracles ceased? 
36 Or have angels ceased to appear unto the children of men? Or has he withheld the power of the Holy Ghost from them? Or will he, so long as time shall last, or the earth shall stand, or there shall be one man upon the face thereof to be saved? 
37 Behold I say unto you, Nay; for it is by faith that miracles are wrought; and it is by faith that angels appear and minister unto men; wherefore, if these things have ceased wo be unto the children of men, for it is because of unbelief, and all is vain. 
38 For no man can be saved, according to the words of Christ, save they shall have faith in his name; wherefore, if these things have ceased, then has faith ceased also; and awful is the state of man, for they are as though there had been no redemption made. 
39 But behold, my beloved brethren, I judge better things of you, for I judge that ye have faith in Christ because of your meekness; for if ye have not faith in him then ye are not fit to be numbered among the people of his church. 
40 And again, my beloved brethren, I would speak unto you concerning hope. How is it that ye can attain unto faith, save ye shall have hope? 
41 And what is it that ye shall hope for? Behold I say unto you that ye shall have hope through the atonement of Christ and the power of his resurrection, to be raised unto life eternal, and this because of your faith in him according to the promise. 
42 Wherefore, if a man have faith he must needs have hope; for without faith there cannot be any hope. 
43 And again, behold I say unto you that he cannot have faith and hope, save he shall be meek, and lowly of heart. 
44 If so, his faith and hope is vain, for none is acceptable before God, save the meek and lowly in heart; and if a man be meek and lowly in heart, and confesses by the power of the Holy Ghost that Jesus is the Christ, he must needs have charity; for if he have not charity he is nothing; wherefore he must needs have charity. 
45 And charity suffereth long, and is kind, and envieth not, and is not puffed up, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil, and rejoiceth not in iniquity but rejoiceth in the truth, beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things. 
46 Wherefore, my beloved brethren, if ye have not charity, ye are nothing, for charity never faileth. Wherefore, cleave unto charity, which is the greatest of all, for all things must fail— 
47 But charity is the pure love of Christ, and it endureth forever; and whoso is found possessed of it at the last day, it shall be well with him. 
48 Wherefore, my beloved brethren, pray unto the Father with all the energy of heart, that ye may be filled with this love, which he hath bestowed upon all who are true followers of his Son, Jesus Christ; that ye may become the sons of God; that when he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is; that we may have this hope; that we may be purified even as he is pure. Amen. 


CHAPTER 8 
The baptism of little children is an evil abomination—Little children are alive in Christ because of the Atonement—Faith, repentance, meekness and lowliness of heart, receiving the Holy Ghost, and enduring to the end lead to salvation. 
1 An epistle of my father Mormon, written to me, Moroni; and it was written unto me soon after my calling to the ministry. And on this wise did he write unto me, saying: 
2 My beloved son, Moroni, I rejoice exceedingly that your Lord Jesus Christ hath been mindful of you, and hath called you to his ministry, and to his holy work. 
3 I am mindful of you always in my prayers, continually praying unto God the Father in the name of his Holy Child, Jesus, that he, through his infinite goodness and grace, will keep you through the endurance of faith on his name to the end. 
4 And now, my son, I speak unto you concerning that which grieveth me exceedingly; for it grieveth me that there should disputations rise among you. 
5 For, if I have learned the truth, there have been disputations among you concerning the baptism of your little children. 
6 And now, my son, I desire that ye should labor diligently, that this gross error should be removed from among you; for, for this intent I have written this epistle. 
7 For immediately after I had learned these things of you I inquired of the Lord concerning the matter. And the word of the Lord came to me by the power of the Holy Ghost, saying: 
8 Listen to the words of Christ, your Redeemer, your Lord and your God. Behold, I came into the world not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance; the whole need no physician, but they that are sick; wherefore, little children are whole, for they are not capable of committing sin; wherefore the curse of Adam is taken from them in me, that it hath no power over them; and the law of circumcision is done away in me. 
9 And after this manner did the Holy Ghost manifest the word of God unto me; wherefore, my beloved son, I know that it is solemn mockery before God, that ye should baptize little children. 
10 Behold I say unto you that this thing shall ye teach—repentance and baptism unto those who are accountable and capable of committing sin; yea, teach parents that they must repent and be baptized, and humble themselves as their little children, and they shall all be saved with their little children. 
11 And their little children need no repentance, neither baptism. Behold, baptism is unto repentance to the fulfilling the commandments unto the remission of sins. 
12 But little children are alive in Christ, even from the foundation of the world; if not so, God is a partial God, and also a changeable God, and a respecter to persons; for how many little children have died without baptism! 
13 Wherefore, if little children could not be saved without baptism, these must have gone to an endless hell. 
14 Behold I say unto you, that he that supposeth that little children need baptism is in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity; for he hath neither faith, hope, nor charity; wherefore, should he be cut off while in the thought, he must go down to hell. 
15 For awful is the wickedness to suppose that God saveth one child because of baptism, and the other must perish because he hath no baptism. 
16 Wo be unto them that shall pervert the ways of the Lord after this manner, for they shall perish except they repent. Behold, I speak with boldness, having authority from God; and I fear not what man can do; for perfect love casteth out all fear. 
17 And I am filled with charity, which is everlasting love; wherefore, all children are alike unto me; wherefore, I love little children with a perfect love; and they are all alike and partakers of salvation. 
18 For I know that God is not a partial God, neither a changeable being; but he is unchangeable from all eternity to all eternity. 
19 Little children cannot repent; wherefore, it is awful wickedness to deny the pure mercies of God unto them, for they are all alive in him because of his mercy. 
20 And he that saith that little children need baptism denieth the mercies of Christ, and setteth at naught the atonement of him and the power of his redemption. 
21 Wo unto such, for they are in danger of death, hell, and an endless torment. I speak it boldly; God hath commanded me. Listen unto them and give heed, or they stand against you at the judgment-seat of Christ. 
22 For behold that all little children are alive in Christ, and also all they that are without the law. For the power of redemption cometh on all them that have no law; wherefore, he that is not condemned, or he that is under no condemnation, cannot repent; and unto such baptism availeth nothing— 
23 But it is mockery before God, denying the mercies of Christ, and the power of his Holy Spirit, and putting trust in dead works. 
24 Behold, my son, this thing ought not to be; for repentance is unto them that are under condemnation and under the curse of a broken law. 
25 And the first fruits of repentance is baptism; and baptism cometh by faith unto the fulfilling the commandments; and the fulfilling the commandments bringeth remission of sins; 
26 And the remission of sins bringeth meekness, and lowliness of heart; and because of meekness and lowliness of heart cometh the visitation of the Holy Ghost, which Comforter filleth with hope and perfect love, which love endureth by diligence unto prayer, until the end shall come, when all the saints shall dwell with God. 
27 Behold, my son, I will write unto you again if I go not out soon against the Lamanites. Behold, the pride of this nation, or the people of the Nephites, hath proven their destruction except they should repent. 
28 Pray for them, my son, that repentance may come unto them. But behold, I fear lest the Spirit hath ceased striving with them; and in this part of the land they are also seeking to put down all power and authority which cometh from God; and they are denying the Holy Ghost. 
29 And after rejecting so great a knowledge, my son, they must perish soon, unto the fulfilling of the prophecies which were spoken by the prophets, as well as the words of our Savior himself. 
30 Farewell, my son, until I shall write unto you, or shall meet you again. Amen. 
CHAPTER 9 
Both the Nephites and the Lamanites are depraved and degenerate—They torture and murder each other—Mormon prays that grace and goodness may rest upon Moroni forever. The second epistle of Mormon to his son Moroni. 
1 My beloved son, I write unto you again that ye may know that I am yet alive; but I write somewhat of that which is grievous. 
2 For behold, I have had a sore battle with the Lamanites, in which we did not conquer; and Archeantus has fallen by the sword, and also Luram and Emron; yea, and we have lost a great number of our choice men. 
3 And now behold, my son, I fear lest the Lamanites shall destroy this people; for they do not repent, and Satan stirreth them up continually to anger one with another. 
4 Behold, I am laboring with them continually; and when I speak the word of God with sharpness they tremble and anger against me; and when I use no sharpness they harden their hearts against it; wherefore, I fear lest the Spirit of the Lord hath ceased striving with them. 
5 For so exceedingly do they anger that it seemeth me that they have no fear of death; and they have lost their love, one towards another; and they thirst after blood and revenge continually. 
6 And now, my beloved son, notwithstanding their hardness, let us labor diligently; for if we should cease to labor, we should be brought under condemnation; for we have a labor to perform whilst in this tabernacle of clay, that we may conquer the enemy of all righteousness, and rest our souls in the kingdom of God. 
7 And now I write somewhat concerning the sufferings of this people. For according to the knowledge which I have received from Amoron, behold, the Lamanites have many prisoners, which they took from the tower of Sherrizah; and there were men, women, and children. 
8 And the husbands and fathers of those women and children they have slain; and they feed the women upon the flesh of their husbands, and the children upon the flesh of their fathers; and no water, save a little, do they give unto them. 
9 And notwithstanding this great abomination of the Lamanites, it doth not exceed that of our people in Moriantum. For behold, many of the daughters of the Lamanites have they taken prisoners; and after depriving them of that which was most dear and precious above all things, which is chastity and virtue— 
10 And after they had done this thing, they did murder them in a most cruel manner, torturing their bodies even unto death; and after they have done this, they devour their flesh like unto wild beasts, because of the hardness of their hearts; and they do it for a token of bravery. 
11 O my beloved son, how can a people like this, that are without civilization— 
12 (And only a few years have passed away, and they were a civil and a delightsome people) 
13 But O my son, how can a people like this, whose delight is in so much abomination— 
14 How can we expect that God will stay his hand in judgment against us? 
15 Behold, my heart cries: Wo unto this people. Come out in judgment, O God, and hide their sins, and wickedness, and abominations from before thy face! 
16 And again, my son, there are many widows and their daughters who remain in Sherrizah; and that part of the provisions which the Lamanites did not carry away, behold, the army of Zenephi has carried away, and left them to wander whithersoever they can for food; and many old women do faint by the way and die. 
17 And the army which is with me is weak; and the armies of the Lamanites are betwixt Sherrizah and me; and as many as have fled to the army of Aaron have fallen victims to their awful brutality. 
18 O the depravity of my people! They are without order and without mercy. Behold, I am but a man, and I have but the strength of a man, and I cannot any longer enforce my commands. 
19 And they have become strong in their perversion; and they are alike brutal, sparing none, neither old nor young; and they delight in everything save that which is good; and the suffering of our women and our children upon all the face of this land doth exceed everything; yea, tongue cannot tell, neither can it be written. 
20 And now, my son, I dwell no longer upon this horrible scene. Behold, thou knowest the wickedness of this people; thou knowest that they are without principle, and past feeling; and their wickedness doth exceed that of the Lamanites. 
21 Behold, my son, I cannot recommend them unto God lest he should smite me. 
22 But behold, my son, I recommend thee unto God, and I trust in Christ that thou wilt be saved; and I pray unto God that he will spare thy life, to witness the return of his people unto him, or their utter destruction; for I know that they must perish except they repent and return unto him. 
23 And if they perish it will be like unto the Jaredites, because of the wilfulness of their hearts, seeking for blood and revenge. 
24 And if it so be that they perish, we know that many of our brethren have deserted over unto the Lamanites, and many more will also desert over unto them; wherefore, write somewhat a few things, if thou art spared and I shall perish and not see thee; but I trust that I may see thee soon; for I have sacred records that I would deliver up unto thee. 
25 My son, be faithful in Christ; and may not the things which I have written grieve thee, to weigh thee down unto death; but may Christ lift thee up, and may his sufferings and death, and the showing his body unto our fathers, and his mercy and long-suffering, and the hope of his glory and of eternal life, rest in your mind forever. 
26 And may the grace of God the Father, whose throne is high in the heavens, and our Lord Jesus Christ, who sitteth on the right hand of his power, until all things shall become subject unto him, be, and abide with you forever. Amen. 


CHAPTER 10 
A testimony of the Book of Mormon comes by the power of the Holy Ghost—The gifts of the Spirit are dispensed to the faithful—Spiritual gifts always accompany faith—Moroni’s words speak from the dust—Come unto Christ, be perfected in Him, and sanctify your souls. 
1 Now I, Moroni, write somewhat as seemeth me good; and I write unto my brethren, the Lamanites; and I would that they should know that more than four hundred and twenty years have passed away since the sign was given of the coming of Christ. 
2 And I seal up these records, after I have spoken a few words by way of exhortation unto you. 
3 Behold, I would exhort you that when ye shall read these things, if it be wisdom in God that ye should read them, that ye would remember how merciful the Lord hath been unto the children of men, from the creation of Adam even down until the time that ye shall receive these things, and ponder it in your hearts. 
4 And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost. 
5 And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things. 
6 And whatsoever thing is good is just and true; wherefore, nothing that is good denieth the Christ, but acknowledgeth that he is. 
7 And ye may know that he is, by the power of the Holy Ghost; wherefore I would exhort you that ye deny not the power of God; for he worketh by power, according to the faith of the children of men, the same today and tomorrow, and forever. 
8 And again, I exhort you, my brethren, that ye deny not the gifts of God, for they are many; and they come from the same God. And there are different ways that these gifts are administered; but it is the same God who worketh all in all; and they are given by the manifestations of the Spirit of God unto men, to profit them. 
9 For behold, to one is given by the Spirit of God, that he may teach the word of wisdom; 
10 And to another, that he may teach the word of knowledge by the same Spirit; 
11 And to another, exceedingly great faith; and to another, the gifts of healing by the same Spirit; 
12 And again, to another, that he may work mighty miracles; 
13 And again, to another, that he may prophesy concerning all things; 
14 And again, to another, the beholding of angels and ministering spirits; 
15 And again, to another, all kinds of tongues; 
16 And again, to another, the interpretation of languages and of divers kinds of tongues. 
17 And all these gifts come by the Spirit of Christ; and they come unto every man severally, according as he will. 
18 And I would exhort you, my beloved brethren, that ye remember that every good gift cometh of Christ. 
19 And I would exhort you, my beloved brethren, that ye remember that he is the same yesterday, today, and forever, and that all these gifts of which I have spoken, which are spiritual, never will be done away, even as long as the world shall stand, only according to the unbelief of the children of men. 
20 Wherefore, there must be faith; and if there must be faith there must also be hope; and if there must be hope there must also be charity. 
21 And except ye have charity ye can in nowise be saved in the kingdom of God; neither can ye be saved in the kingdom of God if ye have not faith; neither can ye if ye have no hope. 
22 And if ye have no hope ye must needs be in despair; and despair cometh because of iniquity. 
23 And Christ truly said unto our fathers: If ye have faith ye can do all things which are expedient unto me. 
24 And now I speak unto all the ends of the earth—that if the day cometh that the power and gifts of God shall be done away among you, it shall be because of unbelief. 
25 And wo be unto the children of men if this be the case; for there shall be none that doeth good among you, no not one. For if there be one among you that doeth good, he shall work by the power and gifts of God. 
26 And wo unto them who shall do these things away and die, for they die in their sins, and they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God; and I speak it according to the words of Christ; and I lie not. 
27 And I exhort you to remember these things; for the time speedily cometh that ye shall know that I lie not, for ye shall see me at the bar of God; and the Lord God will say unto you: Did I not declare my words unto you, which were written by this man, like as one crying from the dead, yea, even as one speaking out of the dust? 
28 I declare these things unto the fulfilling of the prophecies. And behold, they shall proceed forth out of the mouth of the everlasting God; and his word shall hiss forth from generation to generation. 


29 And God shall show unto you, that that which I have written is true. 
30 And again I would exhort you that ye would come unto Christ, and lay hold upon every good gift, and touch not the evil gift, nor the unclean thing. 
31 And awake, and arise from the dust, O Jerusalem; yea, and put on thy beautiful garments, O daughter of Zion; and strengthen thy stakes and enlarge thy borders forever, that thou mayest no more be confounded, that the covenants of the Eternal Father which he hath made unto thee, O house of Israel, may be fulfilled. 
32 Yea, come unto Christ, and be perfected in him, and deny yourselves of all ungodliness; and if ye shall deny yourselves of all ungodliness, and love God with all your might, mind and strength, then is his grace sufficient for you, that by his grace ye may be perfect in Christ; and if by the grace of God ye are perfect in Christ, ye can in nowise deny the power of God. 
33 And again, if ye by the grace of God are perfect in Christ, and deny not his power, then are ye sanctified in Christ by the grace of God, through the shedding of the blood of Christ, which is in the covenant of the Father unto the remission of your sins, that ye become holy, without spot. 
34 And now I bid unto all, farewell. I soon go to rest in the paradise of God, until my spirit and body shall again reunite, and I am brought forth triumphant through the air, to meet you before the pleasing bar of the great Jehovah, the Eternal Judge of both quick and dead. Amen.
________________




THE THIRD BOOK OF MORONI 
THE SON OF MORMON, 
WHO ABRIDGED THE NEPHITE RECORD 
The words of Moroni, as recorded in the Book of the Nem, once he had come to Mentina at the end of the Great War between the Lamanites and the Nephites. 
CHAPTER 1 
1 I am Moroni, the same that called by the Nephites, Moroni. My father was that same Mormon who served as captain of the armies of the Nephites, as were, and I too did serve as their captain for but a brief time. And the account of my service unto the Nephites and the terrible end to which they eventually fell I have written in another book and I have hid it up within the earth even as I was commanded to do. 
2 And I have taken up my abode among the Nem, for I am descended from Nephi and also from Hagoth. Wherefore, I have returned again unto my own people. 
3 And I write in this book concerning all my doings among the people of the Land Northward. I especially wish to give account of Heinmet, who was high priest of Mentina before I returned. Yea, I wish to give tribute to him. 
4 Heinmet was the son of Pa Nat and Ishimhah and just as his mother did learn and become great listening at the feet of the high priests of Mentina, so then also did her son. Yea, Heinmet was a man great in wisdom and in zeal for the ways of the Lord, even from his youth. And behold, the Lord was with him and He did walk with Heinmet upon the Way. 
5 And Heinmet gained favor with the Lord and also with the people of Mentina, insomuch that the Council made him high priest of the city. And he did fill the seat with justice and equity. Yea, I must say that, by all accounts, he administered his calling in perfection. 
6 Now, there came in upon the Nem in all regions of the Land Northward a great fear and dread that the same that was transpiring in the Land Southward might also begin to take place in the lands of the Nem. And none saw this more clearly than Heinmet. Wherefore, he did call a Great Council of the Peli of the thirteen principal cities and they met in the city of Witchittim. 
7 And this city was on the southern-most border of the lands of the Nem, for they had long abandoned the region round about the great gulf in the south unto the people of the Land Southward who had colonized and built settlements there. But Witchittim was in the plains along the northern borders of the gulf region. And it was this city in which my family resided. 
8 In this Great Council, Heinmet gave counsel to all the Peli of the principle cities that they should make preparation for war, which was surely to come out of the Land Southward. It was his opinion that every city ought to build earthworks such as those built by that Moroni of old who protected the Nephites from the Lamanites. Wherefore, it was decided by the Council that each of the principal cities would take counsel among themselves and determine the best defenses that could be devised for their situation. 
9 And the city of Witchittim cast up earth in a great ring around the city. And without this ring, they caused timber battlements to be built. Within the ring of earth, they caused pits and moats to be dug. And within this they caused more timber battlements to be built. And to enter into the city, one had to pass through a narrow gate in the outer battlement and turn and proceed a great distance to reach the gate in the earthen ring. Having passed the second gate, to continue into the city, one was then required to proceed carefully around the pits and over the moats. Then, when all the pits and moats were passed, one entered the city through a gate in the inner battlement. And this was devised so that any enemy would be forced to expose themselves to battle on all sides in order to take the city. 
10 Now, to build such a defense required that the Nem gather from all the region round about in order to provide the labor necessary. And the people left their villages and their settlements from the region round about Witchittim and they lived in one great settlement outside the city. 
11 And this is part of the great evil which Heinmet lay upon himself, that the people were constrained to leave their farms and their homes in order to come in great numbers to build up the strong places. For, it had always been the custom among the Nem to allow no city to grow larger in population than between one or two hundred families. 
12 Yea, even the great cities of Mentina and Corianton had no greater population, for, it was believed that the land could not bear any more and that the people only cooperated well in such numbers. Wherefore, whenever populations of a certain city grew to above that which was considered good stewardship of the land, a new settlement was begun a goodly distance from the city. And this was the manner in which the Nem filled the whole land with people, but still did not overtax the land upon which their people relied. 
13 But behold, because of the threat and the fear of war, the Great Council of Witchittim encouraged the people to discard that which had served them for so many generations. Yea, they began to gather very large populations indeed, in order that they might speedily complete the work of defense. 
14 And this is not all. The Council encouraged the building of a great army for the defense of the people in the southern borders of the land. And in order to provision it, the cities were asked to produce more and to send it to the army. 
15 Now, the cities were built around a certain population and a certain need, and the inhabitants were accustomed to producing according to that need. And behold, the need was visible to all and required no accounting or verification. Wherefore, the people were content to have all things in common and to produce sufficient for their own need and a little extra for trade and to provide for the needs of their neighbors and any sojourners in the land. 
16 But, when there came a need to provision thousands of men in the field, men who worked for the security of the nation but not for their own upkeep, the cities were required to increase their production to meet that need. Now, this was exceedingly difficult to do, for each city was built such and founded such that they need not produce above the land’s ability to bear it. And this had always been a dictum of the people and a byword. 
17 But when cities must increase their population in order to build defenses, they must support that added populace. This was impossible because of the manner in which the cities were organized and laid out. Wherefore, great tracts of land round about the cities had to be opened up for production and this was not possible in most cases. 
18 The other cities of the Nem were asked to produce more and to distribute less to its citizens, the surplus being made available to the great cities of defense and to support the workers in the defense projects. And this became a great drag on the other cities. 
19 In addition to this, a population of men at arms was quickly built up which was vastly greater than the population of any of the cities of the Nem. This constituted a great, moving city in and of itself. What is more, this moving city was a destroyer of land and a consumer of surplus, to the extent that to quarter the army in any one place became a great burden and a curse to any city. 
20 This was entirely foreign to the customs of the people and many cities, though they did not actually rebel against the Great Council, they found it difficult to comply with its decisions. Because of this, there began to be some division in the land, for some cities were built in regions with greater capacity than others. These cities became more important to the work of defense than others and they began to exalt themselves above their neighbors. 
21 Wherefore, during this period it cannot be said that the Nem had all things in common. And we cannot say that they were all of one heart and one mind, for differences and some strife did exist among them. And it is this to which Heinmet took responsibility later in his life and he upbraided himself. 
22 And we cannot sit in judgment of Heinmet and the other Peli who formed the Great Council. Was the threat not real? Was the war not at our doors? I say unto you, It was. I know this, for I did also lead the Nephites into battle, even down to their last destruction. I know that the war did come into the Land Northward just as Heinmet feared and prophesied. Behold, he laid down the seat of high priest before the battle spread up into the lands of the Nem, but I prosecuted the war even unto the end. And I held my father as he died upon the field. And did that not take place well up into the Land Northward? I say unto you, It did. 
23 We must not judge Heinmet as he did judge himself. For, his vision was correct and his prophecy was fulfilled. But, the course that he and the Council decided upon was reactionary and did serve to undermine the foundation of all that was Nem. 
24 But behold, Heinmet did give up the seat of high priest of Mentina and, in the last few years of his life, he did travel from one Council to another recommending to them that they disband their armies and break down their battlements. And many of the cities that were farther to the North and the West did follow his instruction. And it was because of his instruction that the great army that the Nem had built up and maintained for so many years was disbanded. 
25 And those men who had been trained in the work of war did train up others within their own communities against the need for any future muster. But behold, never again in my lifetime did the Nem raise a great army. 
26 And Heinmet also taught the Councils that the people ought to watch carefully the progress of the war as it made its way into the Land Northward so that they might retreat before it. 
27 Now this was a good strategy. For the war did ravage the Land Southward and as the Nephites were driven by the Lamanites and the Gadiantons they did move out of the Land Southward up into the gulf region of the Land Northward. Yea, even as my father strove with the Nephites, they did move ever northward, even until the last battle, which was far to the north and along the Eastern Sea. 
28 But the Nem watched from a distance and were able to move their people out of the way of the war and were not discovered by the combatants. Behold, it is a wonder to me that the Nem were so proficient at removing their populations inland and away from the approaching armies. For, although my father and I knew of their cities and settlements that ought to have lain directly in our path, we did not encounter any people in our march. Behold, we did encounter earthen works and abandoned towns and settlements, but we did not see even one of the Nem, and neither did our enemy. 
29 And this was because of the great counsel that Heinmet gave unto the people, that they should move themselves before the approaching hosts and not make themselves known unto them. Behold, they were not discovered and they remained free from the work of death into which we had thrust ourselves. 
30 Wherefore, judge now the wisdom and the foresight of Heinmet. For, I do believe that he upbraided himself well; for all that, he had nearly destroyed the Nem way of life and even the foundations of Zion in the land. But I also believe that he did judge himself too much. For his counsels, after he had begun to work among all the Nem, were good and did save the nation. 
31 Yea, it must be admitted that his policy of retreating before the approaching hosts of the Nephites and the Lamanites was very effective. For both armies were very much concerned with the day’s fighting and not very much interested in the country round about. And almost they did believe that the land was empty of inhabitants. Wherefore, all the Nephites and the Lamanites did concern themselves only with that which was necessary to maintain their great armies. And, since the few people they did happen to find in the land had nothing with which they esteemed of any value to the sustaining of their armies, they left them entirely to themselves. 
32 This was a great blessing unto the Nem because it afforded them more opportunity to remove themselves from before them, a thing that might have been made more difficult had the armies paid much attention to them. 
33 And all the Nephites of the gulf region became caught up in the war. Yea, and they went into the armies: man, woman and child. And the women and children did follow the trains, serving the needs of the army, leaving their cities and their towns desolate. 
34 And they took with them all their belongings. Yea, they carried with them in the trains all their precious things. Wherefore, these things were the prize of the Lamanites and the Gadiantons who led them. And they were also the prize of the wicked among the Nephites, for there were many Gadiantons among them also. And it is easy, then, to see how both armies, because of their lust for riches and for the shedding of blood, could so completely ignore the existence of even a greater host of people than they comprised. Yea, they could see only themselves and this was enough to satisfy all. 
35 And the Nem evacuated the settlements and cities before the armies of the Nephites and the Lamanites knew not of their existence. Wherefore, only those directly in the path of the war were discovered by either host, and these they found empty of spoil. But there was no time at all to ponder over the ghostly attitude of these cities, for they were ever pressed for the necessity of the war and they could not stay overlong in an unprofitable region. 
36 And the hosts consumed all before them. And so great were the hosts that much country that might have been employed industriously and with providence was trampled into unserviceable mud. 
37 Can you imagine the sight? Can you imagine millions of men with their women and children, and all their baggage, traveling through unknown territory? Can you imagine the desolation simply in the necessity of making their cook fires? Can you imagine the stench they left behind them from the waste of their bodies? Then, I would ask you, can you imagine the wasteland created by the great battles that took place and the necessity of burning the bodies of the fallen? 
38 If you can, then you can imagine the effect that so great a war has upon any land. Such was the destruction in the gulf region and along the Eastern Sea as the Nephites battled to destroy themselves and all before them. Yea, if you can, then you can envision the fruits of the great preparations to which the Nephites went in order to defend themselves against their enemies. Their defense became their ruination and they went from the shedding of blood to the shedding of blood. 
39 So shall be the effect of all great bodies of men and women who take the field together. And had the Nem rallied to the cause of the Nephites or the Lamanites, for the Nem might have claimed them both, they should have been caught up in a like destruction. Therefore, I exhort you once again: Let not any man judge the counsels and teachings of Heinmet, for they were just. And behold, before he died he did recuperate his honor by the great counsel wherewith he did save the Nem. 


CHAPTER 2 
1 Behold, I have written an account of all my dealings with the Nephites and they are kept safe and sound in the library of Corianton in Cumorah. And I will not write them here, for this record is for another purpose and for another people. Wherefore, I have sealed up that other record in a sacred place for a good purpose in the Lord, and also being directed by Him. He has also shown me upon the Way that the same who receive my records of the Nephites and Lamanites shall also receive of other records, among which shall be these words that I leave for the remnant of my own seed and that the combination of all the records preserved and brought forth by the Lord shall be of great use to them who shall receive them in the last days. 
2 This record I write in accordance with the will of the Nem, among whom I do now live. And it is also for a good purpose in the Lord that I write on these plates the things that transpired after the great Nephite war, a war wherein a good people became filled with evil, even to their own destruction. For behold, there are no more Nephites in the land. Yea, they are all gone. And if any survived the horrible work of death that swallowed up their people, they have become Nem and are no more called Nephite or Jacobite, Josephite or Zoramite. 
3 Now, when the last of the battles ended, and thus ended the Nephite race and nation, behold, the Lamanites did search diligently and with much energy in all the land for any Nephite who had survived. And, when they found any, they subjected them to horrible torture and caused that they should deny the Christ. And any who would not deny the Christ was put to death. 
4 And behold, as they sought their enemies, they did often come upon settlements of the Nem. But behold, these they esteemed to be of no interest or benefit to them because they represented themselves as nomadic wanderers in the wilderness. Wherefore, the Lamanites could ascertain no gain from them and left them to themselves. 
5 And these wanderers never had any knowledge of Nephites, or of any other manner of -ites, being uncivilized wanderers. For they presented themselves as simpletons unto the Lamanites, and primitives. And behold, in this way they did camouflage themselves before the Lamanites, that they might not be recognized as the great nation that they were. But they did always move before the Lamanites and were never found in the same place twice. 
6 And it was not long before the Lamanites were forced to give up the search for the escaped Nephites. For, they were concerned for their own nation and had already felt the need of provisioning their armies. And behold, this proved the undoing of the Lamanites, just as surely as it had almost undone the Nem. 
7 For they had become a ravenous people, going from plunder to plunder. And even before the war they were a wild people and did not much to maintain themselves except to hunt and to steal, and those who had maintained homes and fields had long since left them far away in the Land Southward. And this had been their way of life before the war, to take from the land what spoil they could. For they went from battle to battle and had no means of support but the land. 
8 But when the war was completed and the enemy utterly destroyed, the Lamanite armies still lacked any support. They were quickly disbanded and the land was filled with roving bands and brigands. Behold, some of them gathered together for their own protection. But, the greater part of them continued with the war, fighting their own people and killing even their own brethren because of the great want of food. 
9 And before three years had passed all organization had utterly collapsed and the more part of the Lamanites had returned into the Land Southward. Those that stayed behind formed small settlements and villages in a string of outposts along the shore of the sea from far in the north down even unto the gulf region. And they progressed not at all from that time but subsisted on what food and shelter the forests could provide. And behold, the Lamanites that stayed in the Land Northward after the great battle became exactly as they perceived the Nem to be, for they moved about idly, barely able to provide for more than themselves alone. 
10 And the Nem kept aloof from them, except to keep abreast of their movements. But they did not trade more than animal skins with them, that they might continue to support the belief that they were no different than themselves. Wherefore, they kept up a deception with the Lamanites and did not interact very much with them. 
11 For behold, had they allowed the Lamanites knowledge of their cities farther inland and to the north, they would have sought to make war upon them, being attracted to their prosperity. Wherefore, they continued to deceive the Lamanites. 
12 And behold, this deception was adequate to prevent the Lamanites from discovering them. And the villages and settlements of the Lamanites left in the land did very poorly and many failed. And this is because they knew not much about the land and the seasons of this new land. And they knew not how harsh the living was. For, they had come from a lush land that was full of provender. But the Land Northward required great effort during the growing months in order to survive the winter. And the Lamanites were unaccustomed to such labor. Wherefore, the more part of them died in the first winter and more died in the second. Behold, by the third winter, there were precious few remaining. 
13 And those that remained were humbled by the land and they had ceased to strive one with another and to live by plunder, but had used the year to lay aside that which was needed for the winter. And they built structures and shelters and ceased to run naked among the forests. And in all ways they began to behave more like men than beasts. 
14 And unto those did the Nem send emissaries to teach them. Yea, they did send first some here and some there to trade and converse. Then, when the character of the settlements that remained was ascertained, they did send teachers and healers to live with them. And behold, the Lamanites that remained in the Land Northward did begin to see wisdom and they did begin to change in their hearts and repent. 
15 And this should come as no surprise. For, even unto the end of the Great War, the Lamanites were the more righteous than the Nephites. I do not mean for any to believe that they were less ferocious than the Nephites, but they were more easily taught and more easily humbled because of the exceedingly humble circumstances out of which many of them had come before the war. 
16 And also I would have you recall that these were left in the land by the end of the third winter only because they had cast off the work of death and of wickedness to which the more part of the Lamanites had turned, that they might work to secure their own survival in the new land. Wherefore, they were ready to be taught. 
17 And unto these did the Nem venture and they were converted. And when they were converted, they did not advertise to the Lamanites of the Land Southward all their doings. For, the Lamanites who had returned unto the Land Southward returned unto their own places and each city ruled its own people. And behold, each city did battle with its neighbors. Wherefore, there was little trade and little concourse and the converted Lamanites saw greater necessity in maintaining good relations with their neighbors which they had so recently discovered were vastly greater and stronger than they. 
18 And in the space of not many years the Lamanites who had stayed in the Land Northward had been converted, if not to the ways and customs, and indeed into the families of the Nem, then at least into allies and good neighbors, no longer being filled with the hatred that motivated them to come into the land in pursuit of blood. And behold, there was no enemy in the land equally determined to shed their blood. Therefore, they were content to interact in a peaceful way with the Nem, for they did not esteem them to be enemies of any kind. 
19 But the Nem did not renew the cities and settlements in the more southern portions of the land but preferred to encourage the Lamanites to settle there. For it was a land that the Nem had never settled, for it had long been considered part of the lands of the Nephites. Wherefore, the Nem preferred that the Lamanites, who had become friendly neighbors, occupy that portion of the land. 
20 Now, this I believed was a mistake. For, I had more experience with the inhabitants of the Land Southward, be they Lamanite or Nephite, and I feared that because of their way of life and because of their history, the Lamanites would begin again to build and to gain substance. And with this substance they would begin to puff themselves again in pride and lose all the humility that the harshness of the climate in the Land Northward had taught them. Behold, it was my belief that this would bring again the Gadiantons into the land and that it would be a great source of strife and of misery to the Nem who must come after us. 
21 But the Nem could not drive them out of the land without alerting their brethren in the Land Southward of their presence. And they could not support an army large enough to do it without destroying their own society. Therefore, it was deemed better that the Lamanites left in the land be influenced to settle the great empty spaces of the gulf where the climate was more to their liking. And the Nem hoped that they might one day be convinced to become part of their people. 
22 And I went with some few other of the Nem who were of like mind as myself across the great plain and we took up our residence in the great city of Mentina. And I am told that the settlements of the Lamanites were all but abandoned along the Eastern Sea, to the effect that, the Great War, whereby the Nephite race was extinguished, within a few short years became all but a memory to the people. 


CHAPTER 3 
1 Now, when I arrived at the city of Mentina, the Council had not yet called anyone to take the place of Heinmet, whom they still considered high priest, though he had long been absent from the city. 
2 And I took up a stewardship smelting ore and building implements and tools for use by the people. I used the skill that my father had taught me to smelt out various ores and to make durable metals. And, because I felt comfortable and at ease at the forge, the Nem called me the Salamander, which is an implement used in the drawing of the heated metal out of the forge. 
3 And the granddaughter of Pa Nat, even the niece of this same Heinmet of whom I have written, did please me very much. And we had known each other from our youths, but she had grown into a great woman and had not married. 
4 Now, I had not married, for I knew not what end I might make. But when I took up my stewardship in Mentina and I saw that the path before me was not one of war and continual hardship, I desired to marry and to live as other men do. And I seized upon Pa Hinent, the daughter of Pa Hanat and she consented to become my wife. 
5 And we lived happily in Mentina and had sons and daughters. And these are the names of our sons: Shioni, Moroni, Shinet and Pahoran. And these are the names of our daughters: Pa Nathah and Pa Hanatim. 
6 And we desired not to live within the city, for the number of families in the city had grown to very many during the stewardship of Heinmet, and such is the same in all the principal cities of the Nem of the mountains. For, they had gathered in all the people round about to provide for their own defense and the population of the city was become very great. Yea, there were in excess of two thousand families crowded in the city and many of their houses were built upon piers that extended out upon the lake. 
7 But behold, this is much smaller than it was before Heinmet began to return to the tradition of the fathers. For, before he went out to all the principal cities of the Nem to preach a return to the policies of the past, there were more than twenty thousand families within the city precincts. 
8 But I remembered that the Nem did in times past restrict their cities to one or two hundred families and I did not want to raise my children in anything but a Nem city. And we departed out of Mentina with a few friends and we did build a tower upon a prominence along the mountains north of Mentina and below it in the hollow we established a new settlement in the valley of Mentina. And we called our settlement Elak Kowa, which means to return again. And we numbered four families. 
9 Nevertheless, the people of the city of Mentina considered our settlement to be part of that principal city and the Council of Mentina, having left the seat of the high priest vacant since Heinmet’s departure, did call me to that position. Wherefore, I became the high priest of Mentina. 
10 And thirty-eight years have passed since the end of the great Nephite and Lamanite war, and since I delivered up the records of the Nephite to the library of Corianton, which is near even unto Cumorah. And I have traveled over all of the Land Northward searching out those Nephites who might have escaped the war and have found only a few. And when I found any of them in the waste places or residing in any of the cities or settlements of the Nem, I did exhort them to remove themselves and their families even unto Elak Kowa. For, I feared that they might infect the Nem with that spirit which did drive them unto their own utter destruction. And to assure that they turned not again unto that spirit, I did bring them in unto my own city in order that I might help them in their repentance. 
11 For behold, the Nephites, as also the Lamanites, had lost their minds in the war. And they had no more the promptings of the Holy Ghost, nor any good gift, but went from the shedding of blood to the shedding of blood. Yea, revenge and the work of death were their only concentration and they were blind to all else. And does a man lose such a spirit when the war is over? I say unto you, It lingers long in the hearts of men. Wherefore behold, I wanted a generation to pass away without that this spirit might take root anywhere among the Nem. 
12 For it is very true that the thoughts that occupy the mind, and the words with which a man speaks continually to himself, do cause the very same to take place in actual reality. And this is according to the teachings of Timothy. Yea, doubt it not, for Timothy taught that faith moves upon matter, and that matter moves upon other matter, and so forth. And as this movement makes its course outward, behold, it is also at the same moment returning again unto its source. Wherefore, if the source is a mind and a heart so filled with hate that the man is capable of going from the shedding of blood to the shedding of blood, then that faith returns again unto him magnified. And behold, I say unto you, There is no more any place for the works of charity and kindness. For the despair builds upon the despair and is sent out again, only to be magnified again and again. 
13 It is easy for us to contemplate the workings of faith when they have to do with great miracles. But, there is an opposition in the creation and none can retreat from it or avoid it in any way. Truly, that thought or desire that does rise up in the heart of man is magnified, and if he acts upon that desire, it also is magnified. And, if the thing is evil and he repents not of it, the thing is magnified in him, for the world is one eternal round. Of a surety, when that evil returns unto him, for what man can avoid his actions returning, shall it not encounter faith? I say unto you, It shall, though it be bent toward the doing of evil. And, finding in the heart of the man that which is required by the universal law, that evil found there shall be the very matter utilized to fill the void left by the first outcry. Wherefore, great becomes the evil in the hearts of men, lest they repent speedily. 
14 And if they repent, it is by this same law that the evil is diminished, or even extinguished in him. For returning unto its origin, the cause encounters faith of a different kind and this is utilized to fill the void. And, if the penitence is great enough, even the evil might be extinguished. 
15 And behold, if this is the way of men, can you see that it is also the way of a nation? Can you see that, if men repent not, the nation does fall into greater and greater wickedness? Believe my words, for I saw how that my father was constrained by the Holy Ghost to shut his mouth and cease to urge the Nephites unto repentance. And behold, there were no gifts of the Spirit among them and the Holy Ghost had ceased striving with them. And even my father could not write the things which he saw, for he wished not to harrow up the hearts of men by a description of the wickedness of the Nephites. Yea, I may safely say, for I was there and remember, that the Lamanites pursued the Nephites into the Land Northward to destroy them only because of the horror that the Nephites had left behind them. Yea, the Lamanites feared the Nephites and their wickedness and would rather exterminate them than risk the infection of their own people. 
16 Yea, I say unto you, The Lamanites began more righteous than the Nephites in the Great War that overcame and destroyed their enemy. But, the Law of Restoration works upon all things at once. Look and see how the Lamanites, being more righteous than the Nephites, if only in degrees, became just as wicked because of the war. Yea, observe that when the Nephite armies were all destroyed, and the more part of the survivors put to death, did the Lamanites return to their peaceful lives in the Land Southward? Yea, they did return again down to their homes, but not to peaceful lives. They turned again upon their own people ere they left and, after that the survivors returned again into the Land Southward, they so infected the people with their wickedness that there has been a continual state of war there to this day. 
17 And there is no law in the land, for every city does rule its people according to its own policies without respect of that of their neighbors. And they do trade one day with their neighbors and the next seek to take from them their goods. Yea, and yet another day, they seek to take away their lives and carry away the inhabitants of the city as slaves. 
18 Behold, we have no fear that the Lamanites might come up into the Land Northward again to assail the Nem in our day. What we fear is that their wickedness might find place in the hearts of the Nem and infect the people with the spirit of the Gadiantons. It is this against which we watch and labor. For we know that, although we live differently than they, we are but men and are subject unto the same weakness of mind and of spirit. 


CHAPTER 4 
1 Behold, in the fortieth year since the destruction of the Nephites, as I was reading in the archives of Mentina, I found in them a short history of the doings of the Jaredites. Yea, and I found it to be an abridgement of the greater records and of great use unto the convincing of the Nem to diligence in keeping the laws and statutes of God and to the holding of the course which He has set for us. And also, because the record speaks of the utter destruction of an entire people, I have caused excerpts of it to be impressed upon cylinders, in order that small books might be made after the fashion of those that were one time carried by the Nem who journeyed afar off and could not come often to read in the libraries. Now, these cylinders may be infused with ink and rolled upon kirlis or parchments and the impressions left are as if they had been written upon plates, except that the leaves of the books are not at all durable and cannot be preserved. 
2 And this was of great usefulness unto the Nem, but even more so for those few Nephites who had fled from the awful work of destruction and who have taken up their residence in Elak Kowa. For, they set aside the things that filled their hearts during the war and it must be understood that they do not wish ever to return to them, even in their private contemplation. But behold, these little books contain the record of other people and they find it more easy to contemplate the acts of the Jaredites and be reminded, than to remember their own acts. 
3 Yea, so useful was this little book unto the repentance of those Nephites who had come into the Nem after the war, that I deemed it important that they should be added unto the plates that I had left behind in the archive at Cumorah. Wherefore, I did take the record back to Cumorah and I opened the record I had added to that great library and added thereto the abridgement of the record of the Jaredites, even that which we do attribute to Ether. 
4 For my father had made the plates with sufficient space to write a greater record, for who could have known that the Nephites would utterly destroy themselves? Yea, he did add plates unto the record in order that there might be space enough to write a continuing history. And even I did add plates when I had the charge of them. Behold, this has always been the custom of they who had the charge of the records of the Nephites. And even they who had this charge, and were not righteous, still they made more plates and added them to the original. 
5 Wherefore, when my father took up the plates, he found them to be very many and he made new plates whereon he might make an abridgement of the entire record. And when he made new plates, he continued the custom passed down from our fathers, but his abridgement did not fill the plates that he had made. And I also followed in this custom, for, we did not stay in one place but were driven by the war into parts unknown and often enough into places where we knew of no ore to molten. Wherefore, it was a good custom to carry empty plates with us. 
6 But, again I say, my father thought to write a greater history than that which the Nephites left us. And, when the Lord showed him what would be the end of the Nephites, he had already made the plates. And, though he feared that it might be possible, he never quite believed that the fair race of the Nephites would sink into utter collapse and ruin. Wherefore, he filled only a portion of the plates which he had made. And, not having any clear notion of what my own future might bring while I too labored among the Nephites, I too made new plates when the occasion allowed. 
7 And now, for most of my lifetime the records of the Nephites have slept within the library of Corianton in Cumorah, and I traveled to the place where the records are kept and opened again the box in which I had placed the plates, the sword of Laban and the Urim and Thummim with its breastplate, and I took out the plates and wrote upon them the abridgement that Ether had made of the history of his people. 
8 And when I read again the last things that I had written in the record my heart swelled within me even so much that I thought it would break. And I was harrowed up again by the memories of the acts and horrible atrocities of the war and of both parties in it. 
9 And I deemed it needful and full of necessity that I add a little more unto my own record there and the Spirit did manifest also that I should do it. And I went upon the Way and saw the little flock of Gentiles which the Lord would bring into this land in the last days. And I inquired unto the Lord what things I should add unto my record, for the Spirit did manifest to me that my record would come up out of the earth unto the remnant of the children of Lehi left in the land through this little flock. And they would become a little nation among nations and begin to do a great work whereby the record of the Nephites would be spread upon all the face of the earth. 
10 And the Spirit moved upon me and showed me what I ought to add unto my own record to their benefit. And, after I had completed the work, I did seal the remaining plates up with a band, for the Nephites are no more. But now the Spirit does whisper unto me that the sealed portion may again be made useful unto the remnant and that they may be filled up in the end by such as the Lord calls again to record the doings of His people. 
11 And it was four hundred sixty and two years from the coming of the Lord unto the Nephites, and unto the Nem, that I did these things and I am satisfied that a great good shall come of the things that are recorded in my father’s book. For, I have seen the days in which they shall come forth, that the Gentiles shall rule the whole earth and shall control the hearts of the more part of the inhabitants of it. And they shall drive the people even from the shedding of blood unto the shedding of blood, just as the Nephites and the Jaredites. Wherefore, it may be that these records may be at least as useful unto the survivors of that time as they have been unto the Nephite survivors of my own city. 
12 For if in the last days there may remain any who will give up this wickedness and repent and turn away from it altogether, that even the possibility might again exist that a generation might be brought up without the memory of the fallen, then shall Zion be established again. Yea, if it so be that the Lord shall bring again Zion, it shall be among a people that have cast aside the things of the world and its unrighteousness in preparation for a generation of peace. 
13 And I have seen that the Lord shall work upon the hearts of men as He sees fit. And the Holy Ghost does continually strive with all men and women who have the capacity to set aside the world and its wickedness. And I have seen that the Lord will use the Gentiles to do a great work, and a great preparation. But they shall not bring again Zion. Nevertheless, they shall prepare the way before those that shall. 
14 Yea, even as John the Baptist could not make the atoning sacrifice, yet could he prepare the way for One who could. Yea, he did cry repentance in a wilderness of wickedness and a way was prepared for certain good souls to receive their Creator. And even in the midst of awful wickedness, He did comfort them and they were greatly enlightened and magnified. 
15 I have walked upon the Way and seen the day of wickedness. And you may believe me that the day which I have seen surpasses all the wickedness of all the ages. But behold, I have seen that the record which I did seal up in a box and place in the library of Corianton, even in Cumorah, shall be chosen of the Lord and delivered up unto a prophet in the last days. And, though that prophet shall not be found perfect in all things, yet shall the book that shall come to light through him be unto the Gentiles a guide and an anchor. And through it a generation shall be prepared to come again out of Babylon and to establish Zion again in this blessed land. 
16 And I have also seen that the Gentiles shall spread themselves upon all the face of the earth and their blood shall mingle with all the races of the earth. And when this does take place among the remnants of the house of Lehi, there shall rise out of this mingling a Remnant of the House of Israel. And I have seen that this little flock shall establish again a Heaven on Earth, even Zion in the midst of madness. 
17 Yea behold, it shall come to pass in the last days that the spirit of their dead fathers shall rise up again and speak to the matter of their bodies as a familiar spirit which does speak to them out of the dust. And some of them shall turn unto this curious prompting and they shall break with all that is deemed wisdom. And they shall go again into the wilderness, for though the earth be covered with people, so it shall be deemed. And they shall cast off the shackles of their captivity and, putting upon them a beautiful garment and adorning themselves for the wedding feast, they shall fill their lamps and wait upon the Lord. And He shall know them and welcome them in. 
18 And behold, those Gentiles who shall also go with them out of Babylon and shed the sins of the world, for they shall have taken them up fully, they shall even be grafted into the House of Israel with them. Yea, that blood in them of Isaac and of Jacob shall rise up again within them and they shall be remembered of their fathers. And they shall walk again in Zion and shall be numbered among the people. 
19 But the Gentiles who shall not be moved will continue in their wickedness even as the Nephites who could not be moved and the Jaredites who could not be moved. And it shall come to pass that they shall meet the same end. Yea, their ways shall utterly collapse and they shall wander to and fro in search of someone who might lead them again to their former greatness. But there shall be none such to be found, for they shall have lost the capacity to be moved upon by the Holy Ghost. 
20 Recall now the words of the Book of the High Place, that the Holy Ghost does not move upon the beasts or the trees, for they have no need of such movement. Behold, they fulfill the measure of their creation. But unto man it is given to move upwards. Therefore, if he retains the capacity, the Holy Ghost can move upon him. But, when man has given up that capacity and becomes as the beasts of the field, behold, the Holy Ghost shall not move upon him anymore, lest he repent. 
21 It shall come to pass that the more part of the Gentiles shall sink into this awful state. I have seen their day and I have witnessed their doing. Their history shall be one of blood and horror and, though their fathers all be the same, they shall divide themselves against each other and the slaughter shall be as never before in the history of the children of Adam. And the more part of the inhabitants of the earth shall be caught up in this wickedness and it shall be as though an enemy has despoiled the House of God and left it a wilderness. 
22 But, out of the Gentiles shall come a little flock that shall cry in this wilderness as John did. And they shall be esteemed strange among their neighbors, even as John was called a wild man. And they shall be moved upon because of that within them that shall speak as if out of their own dust. Yea, a familiar spirit shall rise up in them such that they shall be moved upon to make an experiment upon the words of the Lord. And they shall be led to the library of Corianton, even unto Cumorah, and one chosen from among them shall take up the record which I have sealed in a stone. And a little flock shall gather and they shall cry out in the wilderness and prepare the way for the establishing of Zion. 
23 And they shall carry a principle into the wilderness and a generation shall attempt to live this principle. Yea, and a generation shall learn somewhat of Zion and they shall experiment with it. But they shall not succeed except in planting the seed. 
24 And it shall come to pass that this seed shall take root in the hearts of but a few of the Gentiles and it shall be safeguarded there for a season to come. 
25 But all the rest shall be caught up in the things of the world and shall suffer. Yea, for they shall attempt to mingle the things of the world with the things of God and this mingling shall befoul all that they touch. And, ere the coming of the Lord, the getting of gain shall have become a law unto them to the extent that precious few shall be rescued. But they that are rescued, because of the memory of the fathers which shall rise up within them, shall be numbered among the Remnant of the House of Israel which shall be left in the land. 
26 And behold, I say unto you, Without this little seed, which shall be planted into the hearts of a little flock among the Gentiles, the Remnant could have no remembrance of the ways of Zion. For, they shall have been driven and trampled and made a hiss and a byword. And it shall come to pass that they shall be caught up also in the drive to become elevated in the eyes of men. And they shall have taken up the ways and customs of their captors. 
27 And it shall be because of the record which shall be delivered to them finally in the end that they shall look again within and find there the blood of their fathers crying in the wilderness. And they shall turn again unto the principles which governed the Nem in the time of their prosperity, as also the Nephites before their destruction and the Lamanites in the times after the coming of the Lord unto them. And they shall little by little, one person here and one person there, one family here and one family there, come out of Babylon and establish Zion once again in this blessed land. 
28 And, because that their blood shall have been mingled with the blood of the Gentiles, this effect shall spread somewhat out into the Gentiles to the extent that some few of them shall join with them and assist them. Behold, these shall be grafted in and it shall be unto them as if they had been born among the Remnant of the House of Israel left in the land. Yea, they shall be adopted in and, though the more part of them be Gentile, behold, the Remnant blood shall rise up and take the hold of the body until they are Israelite every bit. 
29 And when this does come to pass, they shall no more call themselves by the nation out of which their fathers arose. Rather, they shall call themselves by the Name of the Lord their Creator. For they shall have been created anew and peace shall have been written in their souls. Wherefore, they shall call their Lord the Peacemaker and they shall call themselves His disciples. 
30 And it shall come to pass that it shall be as in days of old. And, at least among the Remnant, there shall be no manner of Ites, and they shall have all things once again in common. For, among them shall all the nations of the earth be blended. Yea, among them shall be found all the blood of the creation and they shall be one people, Zion. 
31 It was for this cause that I did add somewhat unto my writings in that book which contains the abridgement of the writings and records of the Nephites. Yea, it is because the Lord showed unto me that a great work shall be commenced among the descendents of Lehi through the Gentiles that the Lord shall bring into this land in latter days, that I did return again unto the hill wherein I did hide up the record of the Nephites and add some few things that I deemed important unto their success. 
32 For, when the Great War had ended and the Nephites had utterly destroyed themselves, I had thought never to write again. And I did believe in my heart that the Lamanites would never cease the work of destruction until all who were not like unto them were destroyed from off the face of the earth. And I believed that they would take the war even unto the Nem until they too were no more. 
33 But I was wrong in this belief and, as I have already written, we see that the Lamanites did not stay long in the land of their conquest and, after the Nephites were utterly destroyed and their light extinguished, the Lamanites returned again into their own lands, and only a very few desired to remain in the land. And behold, most of those that did remain, having in just two years lost the desire for blood, became almost to a man, Nem. 
34 But the Nem continued no longer in their preparations for war, after that Heinmet went again into all the cities and instructed them all to break down their preparations for war and to dismantle their armies. And when this was done, the war was not brought unto the Nem and the Lamanites departed back down into the Land Southward. 
35 And, as a man of war, this was a curious thing to me. For I, even as my father before me, was raised up unto the Nephite people as a captain and a leader of their armies. Wherefore, I was trained in all the matters of war and the prosecution of it was part of my stewardship even from my youth. And it was a wonder to me that the Lamanites did not continue to prosecute the war upon the Nem. 
36 Behold the work of faith! When the Nem had yielded up their fear of war and returned once again to lives of peace and of faith, the war was taken away out of the land. Now, I do not say that it was done immediately. For, the Lamanites did regress into war amongst themselves almost immediately upon having destroyed the Nephites. But I say that the war was not brought unto the Nem and the Lamanites returned unto the Land Southward and there the more part of their wars amongst themselves did take place. 
37 And this is the thing that remains curious to me and is a wonder to me. And behold, it will always be a thing of faith unto me and a reminder of the great power of faith unto the salvation of peoples and of nations. And it shall always remind me also of the great love of God for all those who would follow His path and remain in the way of righteousness.
 
CHAPTER 5 
1 And the Nem did remain in the ways of the Lord. Yea, they did not depart from them and, indeed they had never departed from them, except in the forty-two years of the stewardship of Heinmet. But behold, they had not actually left the path of righteousness during that time, only that they had not all things in common. In this they had left Zion and had returned unto the ways of the world. But they did no mean or low thing, nor caused that anyone should sin, but continued to follow the precepts of righteousness. Yea, they did justify themselves in building up their armies and their cities in preparation to defend themselves against the Lamanites and the Gadiantons. And in this was no sin. But they did not preserve Zion in their hearts as their fathers did before them. 
2 And in this I see the seeds of a great wickedness. For, had they remained in it even after Heinmet had seen that he had led the people in the wrong path and made efforts to correct his error, behold, the Nem would have been no more, just as the Nephites are no more. Yea, they should have all been destroyed from off the face of this land. For, their fear of war would have overcome them, even as that fear overcame the Nephites. And it was fear of destruction that brought upon the Nephites their own lust for the destruction of the Lamanites. 
3 Behold and heed my words all you who would read these writings and ponder them in your hearts. You shall have prophets among you who will be of great use to you in deciding your paths. And when you have confirmed their words by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost, and that Holy Ghost has confirmed that the words they speak in prophecy unto you are indeed the word and will of God, and you take them up and act upon them, see that you do not then turn from them. For if you do, the Lord shall turn from you. 
4 And even if you do not turn altogether from the thing in which the Lord shall direct you, but only in some particular or another, repent quickly. For the Lord will hold you to your promises. And should you covenant with the Lord in a thing and then break from that stewardship, it would be better for you that you had died in that moment instead. For you shall surely suffer the curse that is upon this land and your suffering shall be great. 
5 And if as a people the Lord does lead you and guide you and give unto you commandments, the fulfillment of them shall bring great blessings unto you as a nation. But if you turn from that guidance and make laws unto yourselves that are contrary to the commandments that the Lord shall have given you, woe unto you! For this is what the Nephites did and their collapse and destruction was complete. 
6 Or do you suppose that the Lord will confirm you in your disobedience? He shall not! But you shall be under His condemnation as a whole people until the day in which He does lift the curse from off of this land. But behold, desire it not! For in the moment that He does lift the curse from off of this land, then shall the peculiar blessing upon this land also be removed. Behold, this blessing is great and is put upon this land in order that it might be a place wherein the Lord might nurture Zion in peace. 
7 Now I say these things unto you, as a voice speaking unto you out of the past and out of the dust, because I have seen your day and your doing. You are as the Nephites in this respect, for the Lord has shown unto you His great power and also His great love. And He shall have given unto you commandments which you shall take up with a covenant. And you shall call yourselves a covenant people and blessed above all the people of the earth and elect. 
8 But I have also seen that you shall reject the counsel of God in respect to that manner in which the People of God ought to live. And you shall altogether take back into your bosoms all the things of the world. And you shall desire again the esteem of the world over the love of God. And even you shall shrug and wink at the condemnation of God until it become a thing of naught in your minds and a thing to be discounted and ignored because of all the other things that you do for the Lord and His righteousness. 
9 Yea, I have seen how great shall be the preaching of religion among you. But behold, you cannot preach the truth if you do not live it. Yea, your preaching will have a form of godliness, but it shall deny the power thereof. 
10 And I have seen the Church, as you shall call it in your day, with its temples and synagogues that you shall build up unto the Lord. And I have seen your dedications and your oblations of money and costly things in these great buildings that you shall raise up unto Him. But can a temple built by your hands be the Lord’s house, and can you expect the Lord to abide in it when you do not His commandments? 
11 Behold, you may dedicate every rock on the face of the earth to the Lord, but if you dedicate not your own hearts it will avail you nothing. Yea, there shall be countless many who walk within the halls which you shall dedicate. But I say unto you, Only they who dedicate their hearts shall feel the presence of the Lord in such places. 
12 Behold, all this did the Nem in the days of Heinmet’s stewardship. Or do you think that they did not dedicate their earthen works of defense unto the Lord? And did you think that the great army that they built up was comprised of unworthy and unrighteous men? Do not think it. 
13 But in it the Nem pleased not God in all that they did in preparing for the war that should soon come into the Land Northward. With all their prayers and all their dedications, they built up a great and mighty idol, a thing of power that took all their efforts and occupied all their thoughts. And is this not worship? Did they not create a great golden calf to worship? Behold, I have seen your day and your great golden calf! 
14 Behold, the Nem have rescued themselves. Yea, they have left the path they chose for themselves and have returned again unto the right ways of the Lord, and they are preserved from all that they feared. Could their earthen walls and works have saved them? The Nephites had greater and yet they were driven. Could the great army raised and supported by the Nem have saved them? The Nephites had greater and yet they utterly destroyed themselves. 
15 But when the Nem tore down their towers and their battlements and abandoned those that could not be torn down and when they dismissed their men of war and their army and when they returned again unto that which the Lord had commanded them, they were preserved. Can you tear down your battlements? Can you return again unto that wherein the Lord did command you, but because of your fear of the world you left in the dust in the place of your birth? 
16 Or what shall make you any different than the Nephites or the Nem? Is it that you are so elect and so chosen that the Lord shall give you immunity to that accountability to which He has held all the rest of His children since the world was? Can you believe that the same that befell those who walked this land before shall not befall you also? 
17 And what is it that shall have so qualified you? Are you more righteous than we? Do you greater acts of charity? Do you love the Lord more than we? Do you follow His commandments with greater purpose of heart? Are these the reasons that you shall escape the curse that has been placed upon this land and enjoy the blessing only? 
18 Behold, I say unto you, Nay! I have seen your day, and even I have read the writings of your own people. I have heard the voice of God in the day that He shall condemn you as a nation if you do not repent. Behold, and this before one generation had even passed from the day in which He shall have shown Himself unto you. 
19 The Nem have enjoyed peace in this land for hundreds of years and that peace was unbroken until they departed from that which they had covenanted with the Lord. You shall have departed from your covenant even in the first generation and shall not have returned to it even until the day the Lord shall come again. 
20 As a people also you shall not have had peace, nay, not even in one generation. You shall go from the shedding of blood to the shedding of blood until it shall become a way of life unto you. Yea, I have seen a day among your people and among your nation, in the day that the Lord shall bring this record into the light, when all your citizens shall celebrate your wars even when you shall have escaped destruction by them. 
21 And I have seen you raise up your symbols and make oblations and praise yourselves because of your successes in war, and your heroes shall all be warriors. And I have even seen how you play at war and teach your children to exercise themselves in it so that when they are older they shall be the more easily trained to put aside all goodness. Yea, your warriors shall not be taught to pray for deliverance from battle, but they shall only pray for victory and praise themselves for their might. 
22 And shall your leaders and your prophets stand upon the battlements and upon the walls decrying these things? Shall your great men warn against them? They shall not, but they shall comfort themselves and speak of the good purposes which the governors have for their wars and for their constant contention with the nations. And they stand up before the people and teach war. They shall extol the virtues of those few who are able to feel of the spirit even after they have engaged in the horrible work of destruction. 
23 I do not say that such a thing is evil, for to feel the spirit at all must be a good thing. But is this enough? I say unto you, It is not. For so taught also my father, and so also did I in the midst of the Great War, and yet the Nephites were utterly destroyed. 
24 And what is it that destroyed them? It is that they were engulfed in that awful darkness in which men and women must sink in order that they might lift up the sword in wrath to destroy another human being. And it is a peculiar teaching that takes a young and tender youth from his mother’s bosom and from his father’s knee and makes of him a monstrous thing. I know whereof I speak, for it was my business to do such things. And even I cannot escape the memory of it today – how that I took the young men among the Nephites and made them an army of warriors. This memory continues to harrow up my soul, and though I spend the rest of my life atoning for my part in the destruction of the Nephites, I think I shall still feel the anguish of it all the days of my life. 
25 Wherefore I ask you, ought not every prophet spend a lifetime in decrying this awful wickedness? Should there ever be found a true prophet who can condone the work of destruction and remain a prophet? This, I think, is a thing impossible to ask. 
26 I know that I shall be called a prophet in the latter days, but I say unto you, How could the Nephites see me as prophet and commander all at once? How could I speak words of peace in their ears and then lead them into the work of destruction? Nay, the commander in war is never a prophet unto his people, for, one cannot say in one breath, Love Thy Neighbor, and then put him to death by the sword. 
27 Now, there have been great men and women whom the Lord has called out particularly to take the life of man. Nephi of old was one, as was also Hagmeni and his sons. Behold, for the sake of a nation, they did take life. But this is not the horrible work of destruction, even war. For war takes not only the life of the individual wicked man or woman, it robs a generation of peace. It does not simply root out a singular wickedness, but creates a general desire to do wickedness both night and day and out of necessity justifies itself. 
28 And it is because of this that the Lord speaks peace unto the soul. He speaks peaceable things of love, gentleness and charity. He stirs no man up to open and wicked war. He justifies no man in it. Nay, this is not the way of the Lord. It was not the Lord who called the Nephites up unto battle against the Lamanites. Behold, my father knew and so did I, that had the Nephites left the field of battle, so too would the Lamanites. For the battle had become so sore that both armies would have left it many times and returned unto their own country. 
29 But the Nephites would not. They burned in their hearts against the Lamanites . And so too did the Lamanites burn in their hearts against the Nephites to destroy them. In the beginning, they sought only to defend themselves against the Lamanites and the Gadiantons who led them. But they were very soon so carried away with the desire to avenge themselves upon their enemies that thoughts of defense no longer entered their minds. Or did you think that it was defense of their homes that drove them across the Land of Desolation in pursuit of the Lamanites? And was it in defense of the Nem and their lands that caused them to prosecute the war into the Land Northward even thousands of miles from their own homes? I say unto you, Nay. It was their lust to destroy their enemy utterly that drove them, and in the end, brought upon their destruction completely. 
30 Do you seek after peace? Do not think that I, who have seen your day and your doing, have not also seen those few who shall seek to come out of Babylon and touch not her uncleanness. Yea, I have seen even that little flock that shall bring again Zion in this land. But how shall they do it? What example shall they use? Shall it be the Gentiles and their ways? Or do you suppose that the Jews might have some counsel for them? Where shall they turn to learn what they must know in order to live in peace upon this land and enjoy the blessing of it instead of enduring the curse laid upon it? 
31 Behold, shall they look up to their shepherds in that day - they who have all been warriors and who come of warrior stock and creed - they whose notions about freedom shall overturn their understanding of the commandments of God - they who shall justify even wars prosecuted in far away places whose people had not even seen their own fair homes or known their people? Shall they teach the laying down of the unclean thing? Shall they teach any man or woman anything about that Zion which must be built up in the heart before it may be established in the earth? 
32 I say unto you, Nay. But, they shall surely look to their fathers to find an ensample to follow. Yea, their hearts shall indeed turn unto the fathers, and the hearts of the fathers shall turn again unto the children. And the whole earth shall not be wasted at the coming of the Creator. I say unto you, Men and women shall once again walk upon the Way, and because of this, the records of the fathers shall come again into the light and be had for an ensample unto them. Then shall they take of the things they read of the ways and customs and covenants of their fathers and, seeing distantly as if through a fog, they shall again begin to live in peace. 
33 Yea, they shall have all things in common even in a time when all else is in turmoil. And when all other peoples are at conflict one with another, they shall have peace and shall sustain and support each other. They shall find ways to serve one another and assist each other in coming out of the world. And they shall spread their way of life to other people and assist them also. Great shall be the work of a tiny flock of the children of Lehi in the last days. 
34 For behold, were it not so, the world would of a surety come to naught and shall have been wasted at the coming of the Lord. And how shall you feel, oh son of man, at the end of all things, to have as your report to the Creator of Heaven and Earth that the world was not good enough for peace and the hearts of men were not pure enough for goodness? How shall you feel, you mothers, to have as your report unto the Creator of Heaven and Earth that the daughters of Eve could not find love enough in their hearts to preserve the Earth and they had not gratitude enough to give thanks for the good things of the Earth? And how shall the Earth respond when she must report to her Creator that all things are wasted and that it should have been better never to have been made at all? 
35 I say unto you, All you who shall seek peace in the day of which I speak, beat your swords into plows and your spears into hooks. Put forth your hand to heal the Earth and take good care of her. Lay your hands upon no man or woman to do them injury, but lay your hand to the plow and the sickle to cultivate the good earth and to partake of her generous harvest. 
36 Send not your sons to any war for any reason. Let not your leaders convince you that any cause for war is righteousness, unless the Lord does command it, but lay yourselves down before the blows of your enemies if need be. Yea, in fine, do all that you see that the Ammonites did. Make peace. Live with peace in your hearts. Love your fellowman and do not use him, but provide a surplus in all that you seek to do, that the beggar might not put up his petition in vain. 
37 Yea, in fine, unless the Lord shall command it, make no war at all. Be no part of, but rather shun the work of destruction. For, I say unto you, Unless He does command it, He shall not justify it. And, if He justify it not, it is an abomination of desolation, even like as has been spoken of by the prophets. 
CHAPTER 6 
1 Now, I write these things unto you for what I deem to be a good purpose. For, I could have laid down my stylus and made no more mark upon plates of metal than those which I have already made and hidden up in the earth. Yea, I could have been done with all that the Lord had commanded me to write concerning my stewardship among the Nephites. 
2 But behold, He has not seen fit to let me remain idle now that my days are lengthened, but He has wrought upon me powerfully by the Holy Ghost. And I deem it of some importance that I write these more personal words unto you who will surely read these things in the day that the Lord does bring them out of obscurity. For behold, as I have said before, I have seen your day. Yea, I have observed your doing. And it is a good purpose in the Lord that you should receive the writings of one who has spent the more part of his life in the midst of war and of bloodshed. 
3 Yea, I do see your day, that in it there shall be wars and rumors of war. And your young men and even your young women shall for the sake of peace and safety run headlong into destruction. Yea, they shall cry Peace and Safety as they charge their perceived enemy with horrible death. And in this they shall but repeat that which they shall have heard spoken from the pulpit of the synagogues. Yea, at the feet of their prophets shall they hear the preaching of war and the justifying of death and destruction. And all the people shall pray for their deliverance and the death of all who might oppose them. And this unthinking prayer shall fall from the lips of even the shepherds, and this shall be their teaching. 
4 Yea, they shall cry Peace and Safety, Peace and Safety, then speedily shall destruction come. For, their young men and even their women shall speed to the fore of the battle with these words on their lips. And destruction shall be all their desire and all their prayer. 
5 And their fathers shall likewise pray for the destruction of all who might oppose them. And their mothers shall also pray for their deliverance and for the destruction of their adversaries in battle. Yea, and their tender brothers and sisters shall be taught also to pray for their success and that they might be preserved. But they shall not know that in this prayer they but beg their God to deliver the enemy up to destruction. 
6 And their pastors and their teachers shall justify this prayer and this oblation unto death and darkness. And they shall stand them up on pulpits and on raised platforms and they shall preach all that is required to justify the death of men and of women, of boys and of girls, all for the sake of peace and of safety. 
7 And they shall not see the folly in praying for the peace that is bought with blood and with terror. Yea, the whole earth shall stink with it, and the field shall be darkened with it. The song and voice of a generation shall be swallowed up in it and the sight of the seer shall be darkened by it. Yet, shall they pray for the success of their own in it. Yea, they shall pray to God in Heaven for the death of their enemy and shall call this a prayer for peace. 
8 For behold, peace shall have but one significance to them, that all men shall see things their way. And for this shall they take up weapons of war and they shall destroy fathers and mothers, brothers and sisters and call themselves the very elect of God. And they shall surely justify themselves, for did they not hear even the same from the Lord’s Anointed? 
9 But I say unto you, All you who would take up Zion again and plant her in your hearts – if you would be the messengers of peace, do not deliver your message with the sword. If you would raise up an ensign of peace unto your adversary in the field, let it not be with the war cry that you deliver it. If you would be a light unto the world and put your lamp upon the bushel before the household, have a care that it not burn down the house and the city. Yea, let it not be in the name of the Lord that you strike off the head and part the body of he whom someone has called your enemy. 
10 For none shall bring again Zion by the work of destruction, even war. Let none deceive you. There is no cause that shall justify the taking of the life of man or woman, save it be by the word and will of God alone. And you may believe it; He shall not use any lofty words to puff you up should it be His will that you take the life of any person. 
11 Nay, you shall hear the command and the Holy Ghost shall confirm it, and that is all. Nay, do not expect men to stand and extol you or your calling. Do not expect prophets to cry over your worthiness. Do not even expect to feel justified in it yourself, nay, not in any way. And if it be so hard a thing to take the life of man when the Creator of Heaven and of Earth shall require it at your hands, do not allow mere men to puff you up in the work of destruction to but fulfill their earthly purposes. 
12 For, show me the man who has received of Heaven the vision of eternity – yea, who has even the vision of all things before him - who does then cast all such knowledge aside that he might throw young men and women into battle for the sake of earthly things. Nay, you cannot. For, such a man cannot exist. But the God of Heaven and Earth does have all things before Him, yet He commands no man to battle except in preservation of His chosen people. 
13 What then? Shall you call yourselves His chosen people? Do you live His commandments? Do you keep His law? Is it to preserve this that you cast your young men into battle in far away places among people who knew nothing of your way of life? Do you call yourselves the People of God and walk in His paths that you may so justify bringing unto them from so far away the work of death and destruction? 
14 And because you claim to be the elect of God, do you suppose that He will justify you? Behold, the Lord is bound when we keep His commandments. Yea, He is bound by that same law wherewith He does command us. If we observe to do all that He does command us, there is no changeability in Him. But, if we turn from His ways and from His commandments, behold, He shall also turn away His face from us. We have no promise at all and may not expect anything from Him if we do not keep His commandments. 
15 Now, did He command us to hate our enemy? Or did He warn us to render equity to them that despitefully use us? And if it so be that our neighbor becomes our enemy, did He admonish us to go to and dig a pit for him? Or did He teach that when the stranger comes into our midst that we should strip him and beat him and cast him out? And has He ever taught that we ought to carefully judge our neighbor and render unto him according to our own ways and our own customs? 
16 Yet, these are the things that you shall do even unto all your neighbors, small or great. Yea, this is the vision of your day which the Spirit has shown me. Behold, I say unto you, There shall be some few who feel the promptings of the Spirit in the day in which these things shall be delivered up unto men to judge. And I speak unto you as if you were here even before me. If you be among they who shall think to bring again Zion in such a land and among such a people, let no man, be he prophet or king, convince you to go up to war. Do not think that you can speak peace with the sword. Do not think that you may take up the seed of Zion to plant it in your hearts, with the sword in your hand still steaming from the fray. 
17 Wherefore, all you Sons of God, go not unto any war nor up unto any battle unless it is God’s war and God’s battle, and be careful what you lay at His feet. For, the prize of victory has ever been the bodies of the enemy. Shall not the heads and arms and legs, the swords and the shafts, the horses and the chariots that you lay at the feet of your Sovereign be any different than the heads you shall bow and the arms you shall raise up unto Him, or the knees that you shall bend? And what difference is there between your swords and theirs? If it be man’s conflict, flee from before the face of it. Make no war upon anyone, for perchance you prevail, shall the God of Heaven rejoice in your spoils? And what shall you add to His storehouse but death? 
18 Now, these are words rising out of the dust. Yea, it is as a familiar spirit that I speak unto you. My words are the words of one who has raised the sword against his neighbor. Yea, I have brought down the sword and I have relieved many men and women of their limbs and their lives, and can I call myself justified in the work of destruction? I cannot! 
19 Behold, the war between the Nephites, my people, and the Lamanites was a war of men and not of God. My father was a prophet and a man of God. Yet, he commanded the Nephites in an iniquitous war. And there was no justification for any of them in it, for God was not in it. The work of death had no purpose but death. And even I commanded the Nephites in the latter part of the war. And there was not one of them who raised up their sword because God had commanded them. They did so only to reap a vengeance upon their enemy. 
20 Behold, were the elect of God preserved? Did it profit any man to be a Nephite in the end? Are there any of the Fair Ones left in the land who call themselves Nephite? And did not they who are called accursed prevail against us? Yea, for the Nephites are a race that exists no more at all. And though they raised up their voices in mighty prayer unto God for their deliverance, did He, hearing their prayers, preserve them? He did not. 
21 I ask you, were the Lamanites righteous? Of a surety they were more righteous than the Nephites. But, were they righteous? Did they live the laws and statutes and commandments of God? They did not! Yet they prevailed. And this is the thing that I should like you to consider, all you who would call yourselves elect. Yea, consider these things all you who would bring again Zion in this land. The Lamanites were wicked, yet they prevailed against the Nephites. The prayers of the Nephites were as sounding brass. 
22 It is not to be judged who is elect and who is not. The wars of men never have for their purpose to bring about righteousness, any more than the war between the Nephites and the Lamanites had for its purpose to establish righteousness in the land. Nay! The Nephites desired only the death of the Lamanites and the Lamanites desired only the death of the Nephites. If you take war into a foreign land and to a foreign people in order to establish peace in your own land, you shall harvest the hurricane. You cannot sow peace with death. You cannot get safety by killing your neighbor. 
23 Let this be a tradition and a custom unto you, as it has become a custom among the Nem - that you go not up to battle until the Lord shall be your commander. For, in the day that you raise up some man to command you, you have raised up a golden calf. And in the day that you rely upon the arm of the flesh to establish peace in the land, in that day you shall have planted in the hearts of men an abomination that shall make the nation desolate. Yea, the nation shall become as a barren woman who sits upon the ground. For, the Lord shall not hear the prayers of that nation, and is this not desolation? 


CHAPTER 7 
1 Now, when I had established my own settlement, those who joined with me in it undertook to bring timber down out of the mountains on the East side of the Valley of Mentina. And we sawed the timber and made posts and beams, boards and planks the likes of which the Nem of Mentina were wont to use in the building of houses and other structures, as also for furniture and certain useful tools. 
2 And we discovered that the trees of the valley were not fast growing and it became important to carefully replant the trees as we cut them, lest the mountains become a waste place. For, we had seen the same take place across the desert where Father Hagoth made his first settlement. 
3 For, in the days of Heinmet’s stewardship, the people there had taken all the trees in their preparations for war. And they used them up in all their preparations so that the hills and the mountains were denuded completely. And this proved to be a great folly for them, for without the trees to hold the moisture and the rains, and also to stabilize the earth, the waters ran quickly over it. And when the snows melted in the spring, the waters ran quickly into the gullies and the valleys and stayed not at all in the soil. And because of this folly, the earth did not yield up the fruits of the harvest, but became dry and burnt and the corn died but halfway to harvest. And all this because the people, in their haste to protect and defend themselves, had not taken the time to consider the needs of the land. 
4 And there are people in that place today, but never so many as was supported in times past because of the destruction of the forests. And in the place of many settlements and villages, as was once the state of that part of the country, there remains only one small village today. Where once there were thousands of Nem in that place, yea, tens of thousands, now there are only but a few hundred and they require assistance every year from the other cities. And all this did take place in the space of but one generation and many cities and villages which had been the home of many families of the Nem for generations were become desolate and empty. 
5 And we did not wish this to happen in our own valley. Wherefore, we took great care to replant three trees for every one that we cut down. And in this manner we did continue to build up the forests of Mentina. And all the people who cut trees did begin to emulate our practice. 
6 And the waters that came down out of the mountains each spring did continue well into the summer. And we had much water for our crops and our livestock. And behold, the shallow lake that filled the southern end of the valley continued to produce fish for meal and birds of all kinds for the table. 
7 And above the lake the Nem worked the ground and planted grain of all kinds. And also they did move livestock up into the hills on the west side for there was much grass there. And they ran stock in the hills from which the people made all manner of clothing from the wool and the hair, and also of which they had meat and meal. 
8 And also, when one crossed through the mountains which protected the Valley of Mentina on the west, there were yet other valleys. And in one just west and north of Mentina, there was a great lake around which the Nem did build many villages. Yea, the lake gathered many waters from the mountains far in the east and many villages were built up upon its shores. 
9 And this lake was deep and full of fish of larger size than those which inhabited the lake at Mentina. And these fish provided much food for the people. And they also planted fruit and grain of every kind along the shores of the lake, and there was much game. 
10 But west of the lake there are mountains that are filled with many kinds of ores. Yea, there one may find iron and copper, beryl and gold in some quantity. And these the people smelted into all manner of useful tools. And also they found and quarried stone of great beauty that proved very useful in industry and in the making of tools and of ornament. 
11 And again further north there was a lake of salt water like unto the sea. And this place was largely barren except in the places where fresh water did run into it. And the people did not build many settlements there, except in those places where the salt was dried and harvested. And in these places were a few settlements built up to accommodate those who made their living drying salt for trade with other cities and settlements of the Nem. 
12 Now, certain of the Nem saw that the Great War between the Nephites and the Lamanites had brought much destruction upon those parts of the Land Northward into which it had moved. But, when the Nephites had all been destroyed and the Lamanites could not support themselves after their wants, they left many horses and beasts of burden upon the land. And many of the Nem took up these horses and beasts and brought them into their own lands and husbanded them. 
13 And these beasts became popular for transport, both the cattle and the horses, but most especially the horses. For, upon the plains, it could be difficult to follow the great herds on foot. But with horses as swift as the herds, and requiring no special provender, they were able to greatly improve their manner of living. 
14 And the people of Nespelem became great in the breeding and management of these horses and they did produce them in great numbers. And behold, so proficient did they become in their management, that they did bring into breeding the production of such variations in color, in size and in form that they did greatly improve them. 
15 Now, among their horses there was a kind that pleased me very much. Yea, and it also pleased several of the men with whom I had established my settlement. And this kind of horse had a body all of one dark color such as black or brown but the hindmost parts were white as with a blanket. And some were almost white as with a blanket full of holes. Such was the spotting of this variety of horse and we were desirous to obtain them. 
16 For, they are beautiful and also easy to see. And this seemed to us a good thing here in the mountains, for they would be less easy to lose in the forests with these patterns. But this is not all. The people of Nespelem had bred these horses to be hard in the hoof such that they needed much less attention to keep them sound. And they were also shorter in the body than the horses found in Mentina and this seemed to us a better build for use in the mountains. 
17 Wherefore, I took a group of young men and boys, those who could be spared from the work of our mills, and went with them even up unto the people of Nespelem. And we took lumber as is used in the building of furniture and useful tools with us to trade for horses. 
18 And the people of Nespelem would not take our lumber, for they had much timber of their own and had no need of ours. But they did insist that we take horses with us even down into Mentina, for they were pleased that the kind of horses they had developed for their hilly and mountainous terrain might also have usefulness in the mountains and hills of Mentina. And also they were wont that the line be diversified and become not too close. And it seemed to them that some good stock from among the horses of Mentina might be introduced into the line without ruining it, and in this way, the line might be strengthened. 
19 And we were desirous to join with them in the breeding of these colorful horses, for there were none like them anywhere else in all the land. Wherefore, because we liked them so much and were desirous to engage with them in their further development and preservation, the Nem of Nespelem did insist that we take of all that we desired down into Mentina with us. 


CHAPTER 8 
1 Now, one of the young men who accompanied me up into Nespelem was my son Shioni. And he found favor with the granddaughter of Henmiet and Panith-Akek. And Panith-Akek was yet living and called him in to take council with him, and they did speak together for many hours. And when Shioni came from council with Panith-Akek, he treated with the father of the girl and asked for her hand in marriage. 
2 Now, this Panith-Akek was the same who traveled into the north with her husband, Henmiet, to begin a new settlement. And it was this same Panith-Akek who was the daughter of Phenith-Pel who had come up from the city of Hez in the Land Southward and who had married Sabel-Nah, the daughter of Hamit, the high priest of the city of Tarramarhah. 
3 And behold, Tarramarhah was utterly destroyed and the land round about it was laid waste in the Great War between the Nephites and the Lamanites. And all the people fled out of the land and made their homes in other cities. And all those who stayed were destroyed or enslaved by the Lamanites. 
4 Wherefore, the granddaughter of Panith-Akek was among the last of a generous line of Nem and she was highly esteemed by her grandmother. For, Panith-Akek had looked upon the Way and seen the history of her granddaughter and her descendants. And in the vision she beheld that much restoration would come unto the people in latter days because of the seed of her granddaughter. And she saw in her vision that there would spring out of her womb a restoration of many things lost to the people. 
5 And it is because of this that Shioni took to himself the name of his wife and became, Shioni Akek from that day. And he made a pledge and a covenant with the aged Panith-Akek that all his children would also carry her name, and all their children also, so that her name might not dwindle and become lost. 
6 Now, the people of Nespelem adhered strictly to the customs of the Ammonites as described by Shi-Tugo and, because of this and the necessity to take part in the many ceremonies required by the ways and customs of the people of Nespelem, we were constrained to prevail upon their hospitality for a season. For my son would not leave without that he and Paniet-Akek should be made husband and wife. 
7 And we had arrived in the Valley of Nespelem late in the season and the snows were approaching. Wherefore, we did remain in Nespelem all winter and only undertook to make our return unto Elak Kowa after the river was free of ice. 
8 And certain of our young men took this example that my son set for them and they also sought the hand of the daughters of Nespelem to wife. For while we were there, some few of the young men of Elak Kowa found favor in the eyes of the mothers of Nespelem and also of their daughters. And they were given as husbands to several. Wherefore, when the time came to return again down into Mentina, it was not with horses only that we returned. And in this way was the bond between our two cities made the stronger. 
9 But while we yet sojourned with the family of Panith-Akek, I took it upon myself to instruct them in the making of strong metal and of implements and tools. This is a thing which my father had taught me and, seeing that the art was not had among the people there, I did teach them. 
10 But behold, it is a curious thing that took place in Nespelem. For, though the people were pleased with the things that I taught them, none of them took the art up as their stewardship, preferring to be husbandmen instead. And this is a thing I have observed often among the Nem of the Mountains. The people of a region become set and accustomed in the things that their fathers undertook and do hardly make a change in their stewardships from one generation to another. So it was in Nespelem. The young men preferred to be husbandmen of horses and of cattle, and to attend to all things pertaining to that stewardship over anything new that might come to them from another place. 
11 But they did all honor me and my company in all the long months that we remained with them. For, when the snows come in Nespelem there is no traveling from one place to another. And this is because that the snow mounts up rapidly unto a very great depth and it becomes difficult for the horses to travel. Wherefore, the people of Nespelem do not travel in the winter months, but remain for the most part indoors. 
12 And it is in these months of the year that the elders recite the stories of the Heroes of the people. They tell the tale of Hagoth and his journey up the Akish. And also of the Twins who took of the miracle of the great fish and made the people well with the contents of its belly. And also they recite the tales of Elak Kowa and the Gadiantons. And they also tell the stories of the prophets who were called away down to preach against the wicked cities of the Land Southward. 
13 But the stories that were enjoyed the most by the children were those of the visit of the Great Healer, even that Jesus Christ, to the Nem. And the story tellers never embellished, but read directly from the scriptures about His visit and recited directly His teachings. 
14 And it was when the children and the elders sat down to do work of all kinds inside the lodge that the elders did commence to tell the Hero stories. And all the people listened as they went about their labors. And behold, this did shorten the day and cause it to pass meaningfully and with joy. And also in this way did the elders reestablish the importance of the Good Word in the hearts of the young people and the children. 
15 Now, when the snow had ceased and the river began to lose its covering of ice, we did make ready our plans to depart again out of the Valley of Nespelem and take our journey down into Meninta. And there had been many marriages while we were sojourning with the people of Nespelem and many families were added upon. And we were laden with the gifts given to the young couples, so much so that we had no room for the provisions given to them and were constrained to leave behind all the lumber we had taken with us. 
16 And this did please us greatly. For we had carried the lumber up into Nespelem with the idea of trading for horses, but the people would not take of our lumber in trade, preferring to give us the horses simply because we had a need of them and desired them greatly. Such was the way of the people of Nespelem. 
17 But they were constrained, because of the marriages, to take our lumber as a gift in return, for we had not room in the wagons to take it back with us. And we were well pleased that we could make of the work of our hands a gift unto so generous a people. 
18 And we did, at last, undertake to make our journey back to our home. For we desired to return again to our own stewardships and rely no more upon the generosity of our neighbors. And I did desire greatly to return to my own house and my own hearth. 
19 And when we arrived again at Elak Kowa, the families came out and met us and how great was their joy to find such additions to the settlement. For the daughters of Nespelem were strong and fair, and they were eager to meet their new relations. Yea, they brought great joy to the Mothers of our settlement. 
20 And the men of the settlement came out altogether and they built lodges for the new couples, and each one had their own house that summer. And the women did take the new Mothers in and make them very welcome. And they did meet in Council and all the new Mothers were taken in by them. 
21 Behold, this is the way of the Nem. There is no strife over place or position. And who were these young women to stand in the same stature as the Mothers of the community? Who were they to come from a foreign town and take up places of importance among their mothers-in-law? Behold, there was not one word of dissent or discord, because that each of them were now Mothers of the community. And this is according to an old and very worthy custom. 
22 And it is well that they observe to keep this custom, for, if there were strife and discord, the life of the community would be all confusion. Behold, it is the Mothers who teach the young children and form their characters. And they do nurture them in every good thing. But, if the little children learned strife from their mothers from a very young age, there could be no thought of peace when they grow older. But every man and every woman would follow their own law and their own customs and would be in contention and competition one with another. Behold, I would ask you, could there be peace in any such community? 
23 Therefore, you who are mothers, see that you do as the Mothers of the Nem do. Teach peace in every example to your little ones. For, though they be little in stature, yet are they intelligent. Yea, they are endowed with intelligence that you know not, nor is it easy to perceive. But they do learn and take on the attributes of their mothers. 
24 And you husbands, how can your children help but belittle the place of Mother in the community if you do it in their sight? The Mother is the most important person in the village. It is to teach this truth that Shi-Tugo and Hemen taught the principle of the Mother’s Council. Yea, it is for this cause - to teach the little children the importance of peace in the village - that the Mother’s Council is the governing council of the people. Then, if this be so, and you slight the Mother in your own home and make of her station something less than holiness and righteousness, yea, if you make of her a slave and a servant, dependent and weak, how shall your children grow in truth and in power? 
25 I say unto you, They shall not, but the Mother in your home shall become despised. And, learning to despise she who gave them life, shall your children learn to love anything worthy? I say unto you, Nay. They shall be despisers of every good thing because that the first good thing in their lives was despised in their sight. And shall they love the Lord their God and despise their own mothers? 
26 And, if the young girls are raised up in the belief and the knowledge of their importance to the community, shall they then take on evil attributes? Shall they make themselves despised by the people? I say unto you, Nay. They shall be filled with every virtue, for there shall be no doubt of their worth and of their abilities. 
27 And, if young men have been raised up in this same belief, shall they become strikers and abusers of women and children? Again I say unto you, Nay. It shall not be so. For, shall a man strike and abuse that which is of the most value to him and to his fellows? Not at all. 
28 Behold, I have lived within the company of men whose only business was the work of destruction and of war. And, because the women were not of the same physical stature as they and because they were unable to work that profession to the same degree of ferociousness as the men, they esteemed them to be of lesser value than they. Yea, and they esteemed their women as workers only and worthy only of that distinction given to them because they provided services to them. 
29 And the men grew coarse with the women and with the children. For their desire was unto their possessions and unto their great pride. Wherefore, the value of women was not built upon their worth in the village, but as their worth in providing for the men and their needs. In this way, the women became mere chattels, as also the children. 
30 Behold, the little children were not blind nor unintelligent. They saw the manner in which their mothers were treated by those who were esteemed great. And they emulated their fathers, both sons and daughters, and they esteemed their mothers to be mere possessions while serviceable and burdens in their age and infirmity. 
31 And the young men became strikers and abusers of women and of children. And the family was esteemed like unto their stock or their weapons – as things and substance that either enriched or impoverished. 
32 And in this way did the Nephites and the Lamanites both lose that which was most desirous in life. Yea, and in the end they lost even the desire to live, but went from the shedding of blood to the shedding of blood. Behold, at the end of the day they went down into sleep wishing and praying that the following day’s battle might bring them down into death and end their suffering. 
33 And the hearts of men failed them to the hurt of all they loved. Yea, and they even lost the ability to love at all to the extent that when men took women to wife, they did love and make a lie. Behold, this is a thing most evil in the sight of the Lord. 
34 Wherefore, I would exhort you who would receive these, my writings, if it be wisdom in God that you should receive them, that you ought to ponder them in your heart. And if it be wisdom in God that you should receive my words, then let them have effect in you in such a manner as to restore in you the love of life if you have lost it. And if you are not sunken down in despair, let my words also have effect in you in such a manner as to preserve in you the love of life. 
35 For lust is no preserver, neither restorative. It destroys the heart of man, that it fail him. It wrecks the love of women, that they fail the children. It mutes the love of children, that they learn not virtue. 


CHAPTER 9 
1 Now, Paniet-Akek had also the gift of her grandmother, Panith-Akek, in that she walked upon the Way with ease and received much revelation there. And she was a great prophet and was of great worth to her people. Wherefore, that Shioni gained favor in her sight was a great honor to him and to his people. And that he gained favor in the sight of her grandmother was also deemed a great honor by the people of Elak Kowa. And our family was joined with a family greatly blessed with the gifts of the Spirit by the union of our children. 
2 And the gifts of Panith-Akek and of Paniet-Akek are greatly to be desired, for they are the ability to walk and talk daily with the Grandfathers, with angels, with the spirits of just men and women made perfect, and with the Christ Himself when need be. 
3 Yea, so great is this gift that all the Nem aspire to possess it and they work diligently to acquire it. For behold, it is a gift that does come naturally to those upon whom the Lord sees fit to bestow it, and this is usually when He has some special purpose for that person. But it is also among the gifts of the Spirit unto which we may aspire. And the Lord does make it available to all who would have it, but it comes only by much diligent labor. 
4 And this is the manner in which the Nem do teach their children to labor to attain this great gift: 
5 From the earliest age, yea, even as soon as the child is able to comprehend the words of its mother, every child is taught the teachings and principles of the High Place. In this manner, the child comes to an early understanding of the realities of the Universe in which we live. For it would not do for the child to have any misconceptions of the nature of the Universe and of creation. Such things do become great impediments for those wishing to walk upon the Way. 
6 For, the Way is a construct of the creation. And it is made up of the matter which the Creator took back to Himself when the first of our race left the protected place which was their first home. Yea, when First Woman, who is represented by Mother Eve, first decided to leave the place of protection and when First Man, who is represented by Father Adam, decided to remain with her, and so all of the people followed them also, the Creator took up again all that which made up the First Home, which is represented by the Valley and Garden of Eden, and with that matter He made the Way. 
7 Now, the Way is not to be understood to be part of the Spirit World wherein we lived before the World was made. For that is a different creation and has no part of the type and kind of matter out of which the World was made. But the Way is made from matter that makes up part of the World in which we live, but having been protected by the Lord, it remains under His influence. Wherefore, it is said to be part of the Terrestrial World wherein there is no death. 
8 And the Creator so constructed the Way that it makes access unto all other places in the World, even all the kingdoms therein. And a person who attains to this gift gains access to all places and kingdoms whereunto the Lord sees fit to give guidance. 
9 Wherefore, it is better that little children be taught the truth of Creation, that when they seek entrance upon the Way, they might not be encumbered with misconceptions which might prove a stumbling block to them. 
10 And the child is taught to completely set aside the things and thoughts and intentions of the world. Yea, only when a person is able to set aside, even for a moment, the things of the world can access to this place and to this gift be attained. And the Nem train their children in the art of setting all things aside in order that their minds and hearts might be clear of them, that their minds might be single to the purposes of the Lord. 
11 And it is a characteristic of those who find it easier than others to gain this gift that they are also the more able to set aside the world and all unclean and unholy thoughts than most. Yea, these are they who also find it the easier to follow the path of the Lord in their daily walk and talk of life. For, it is very true, that to walk upon the Way is the beginning of the Calling and Election of the Lord and a more sure word of prophecy. Wherefore, to set aside the world and its distractions is the first step in attaining to the great gift, even to seek and find the Christ and speak with Him face to face. 
12 And this is the very cause that mention of it is made in the Book of the High Place and that this principle finds reference in the ordinances of the Temple. Yea, Adam and Eve are introduced into the Terrestrial World and there they are taught further light, truth and knowledge pertaining to the kingdom and the power and the glory of God. And this thing is sealed unto them by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost, by which gift and power the man and the woman might know the truth of all things. 
13 Now, I ask you, who is Adam and who is Eve, when we go up unto the Holy House to be instructed in all things Holy? And when they stand at the veil of heaven, do they stand alone in their own merits? I say unto you, Nay. But behold, the Peacemaker stands next to them and assists them in all that they must learn and do in order that the veil might be rent from top to bottom and from bottom to top, and be undone in them. 
14 And the children are taught to diligently study the principles of the High Place and also to seek an introduction into the Terrestrial World at an early age. 
15 And for many, this training includes the manner of setting aside all physical distraction for a space of time. And for some this means the sensation and distraction of the body and they are taught to put such things aside. And they are taught the manner of meditation and prayer that does assist them in this endeavor. 
16 For, it is very true, that for some the distraction of their actions, as also the actions of others, is that which constitutes their greatest obstacle. And for others, their words, as also the words of others, are that which are the most distracting. And still for others, the needs of the body and the sensations of the members are that which are the things that do prevent them. All these things present obstacles to the mind and the spirit and the children are taught through diligent exercise to set them aside. 
17 For the mind and the heart must be free of such things and filled only with good and righteous intention. Until such a state can be achieved, the Way will be an obstacle to the progress of the individual. For it is upon the Way that the man or the woman does make the mighty change of heart. Yea, it is upon the Way that a new creation is made within the man or the woman. And this new creation is able to stand in the presence of Heavenly and Holy Beings. But behold, without this change the man or the woman must remain as they are. 
18 Behold, this is the purpose of the Way, which is revelation. Recall that no unclean thing may stand in the presence of God. This same principle applies to all Heavenly or Resurrected Beings. But, as telestial creatures, we are all unclean and unable to stand in the presence of God, for should we attempt it, we are destroyed. 
19 And this is not because that God does not love us, or that He is a respecter of persons. Nay, it is because that the light and truth which does pervade the very body of the resurrected and perfected being is greater than that which fills us and gives us life by such a degree that mere proximity to it disrupts that power which holds all bonds together in the telestial bodies. Yea, and when it is within the pleasure and purpose of God to visit telestial man or woman, He must provide a way whereby such a one might receive Him without the disruption of the telestial body. 
20 But behold, the principles and the ordinances of the High Place have for their purpose to change the mind and the heart of men and women such that they are able to be filled with good intention. And when this is accomplished in them, a change is also made in their physical being. This is what is meant by the mighty change of heart. For, they are made new creations. 
21 And does a man enter again into his mother’s womb, and is he born again? Nay, but he is made and created anew and comes forth a new being. And, though his body is still telestial and will remain such until he has completed his task in mortality, yet shall he stand in the presence of the celestial because of that great gift given only by the Son and attained only through the Holy Ghost upon the Way. 
22 Now, there are many ways in which this great gift is given and they are dependent upon the gifts and talents of the individual. Unto some, it is given to know the mind and will of God without seeing His face. But they receive His image in their countenance. Behold, they walk and talk with the Peacemaker and with angels and need no visual image to return again and remember all wherein they were instructed. And they receive revelation without visions and without dreams, but with pure and simple insight. 
23 And others receive His presence and the presence of angels to instruct them, but cannot remember without the vision and the image of the Instructor. These, because of their gifts and their talents, do go upon the Way with images and visions. Yea, they require such things in order to retain the memory of the instruction. 
24 And still others, must have devices to focus the mind such that they might set aside all distracting thoughts for a space of time. Unto such are given Urim and Thummim, and also Seer Stones and the like. And these are useful tools in the attaining that state of mind which allows them to walk in that intention that is required by the laws and dictates of creation. 
25 And with those who walk upon the Way without visual confirmation, the Gift of Discernment is usually among the strongest of the gifts of the Spirit found in them. And unto they who have the gift of visions and of prophecy, they usually walk upon the Way and must see and hear with images and visions. And unto they who have also the gift of the Seer, devices are most often employed and necessary for them to walk upon the Way. 
26 And these are examples, and but a few. For the gifts of the Spirit are many and they effect upon the manner in which a person does receive revelation. And, since such things are many, the ways in which one might walk upon the Way are also many. And, unto such who have labored diligently to attain all the gifts of the Spirit, the manner in which that person does gain access to the great gift are also many. 
27 And now, I would beseech you and exhort you to seek after every good gift. For, in order that we might be assisted in attaining all the good gifts, the Lord does give unto each some of the gifts of the Spirit through the Holy Ghost. But He does not give all at once, but requires that we make great effort and vest our interest in the attaining of the remainder. And, if we make no good use of the gifts He freely gives, and if we do not improve our time in mortality and seek not more of the good gifts than what He does bestow upon us out of His good grace and desire that we prosper in this life, then we go out of it with only that degree to which we were satisfied to aspire. 
28 But, receiving every good gift with which He sees fit to begin our instruction, if we then step out and work to obtain all the gifts of the Spirit, then we shall surely receive greater truth and knowledge in this life and our understanding shall be greatly expanded. Yea, and though we fail in attaining all the gifts of the Spirit, because we did wear out our lives in diligently seeking them, the Lord shall be the more pleased to open up unto us the mysteries of the Heavens because of our natural efforts in seeking His face. 
29 This is the teaching with which the Nem do instruct their children. For, what mother shall not desire for her child the visions of eternity? And what father shall not desire for his offspring the truth and knowledge and peace that comes by walking and talking with angels? 
30 Behold, it is because that the mothers and fathers in the world do not teach these things that men and women must rely upon the words of others, and this is a very great evil which shall be vexatious. 
31 Behold, in many ways they do enthrall themselves unto wicked men only because they have not been taught to put away the world and seek personal revelation upon the Way according to the good gifts in them. But, if a man or a woman may walk upon the Way and receive revelation daily, they shall rejoice in the truth that springs from that one who is blessed with the gift of prophecy. But behold, they shall not be left without that whereby they may receive also the confirmation of the truth or the interpretation of the prophecy for themselves. They shall become the servants of their fellow man but not their slaves. 
32 Wherefore, again I must beseech you and exhort you, seek after every good gift. And this is done through study, through prayer, through personal sacrifice and through fasting. It is done by diligent effort on the part of the one desiring the gift. For, one cannot receive a gift simply by wishing for it. It is for this cause that the Nem build synagogues for the instruction and support of the people. Yea, and it is for this purpose that the Lord commanded that they call upon the gifted to be teachers and priests unto the people. 
33 And do not pray for the Lord to make you worthy for any gift. Nay, but make yourself so. And do not pray for the Lord to make your intentions pure. Nay, but make them pure. Surely, all that the Lord has taught the sons and daughters of men does instruct in the manner in which this might be done. Therefore, do not importune the Lord to make of you that which ought to be your work. 
34 Surely, the Lord could do it! But He shall not and you shall stand in your sloth at the end of your life and wonder how the Lord could have been so uncharitable unto you. Behold, I say unto you, Judgment is given unto the Peacemaker. Do not take it upon yourself to judge the Lord. 
35 But, if you diligently act to attain to all the gifts of the Spirit, then your actions shall have judged you of pure heart and of pure intent. And the veil shall be rent in you! Yea, and it shall be as if you were born without it in the first place and you shall be a new creation, and set apart from the world. 
36 And when Jesus did visit the People of Corianton, He did tell them of a man of Jerusalem who asked what must be done in order to enter into the Father’s Kingdom. And He answered him, saying: 
37 Unless a man be born again, he may not enter. 
38 And the man asked him: 
39 Can a man enter again into the mother and be born again? 
40 And the Lord answered him again, saying: 
41 Unless you are born of the Water and of the Spirit, you may in no wise enter there. 
42 Now, He was not referring to the birth of the body. To be born of the water is to make a covenant to be of the Body of Christ. That is, to recognize that all things are created by Him and that our matter is His. When we do this we do bear the body of Christ and are born of the Living Waters. 
43 To be born of the Spirit is to have sealed in us the very image of His countenance. In other words, that which we only borrow in mortality, may be made ours for all eternity. This matter, which is Christ’s, is sealed up unto us and we become partakers of everything that is His. 
44 Behold, is this not a mighty change? In this way, we are able to bear His presence because we are born of the Spirit. Yea, we are carried by the Holy Ghost into His presence and may then be presented by Him at the Veil of Heaven, having the mortal veil removed from off our bodies. 
45 And we become a new creature. Our bodies become bodies terrestrial and we are introduced into the Terrestrial World, being no more bound by the telestial and having begun to cast off the world. 
46 It is for this cause that the mothers and the fathers of the children of the Nem do teach their little ones to set aside all distraction and to ponder and meditate upon holy things. And this exercise is most instructive, for it teaches a great principle. Yea, it gives the young person much experience in casting off the things of the world and in preparing to see the face of God. 
47 Wherefore, every Nem sets apart a portion of each day and spends it in this pursuit. Yea, every day becomes a Sabbath to them and every table an altar. For they do dedicate themselves to cleansing the inner vessel and in making themselves fit to be born by the Spirit even into the presence of the Peacemaker, that He may see fit one day to bear each of us into the very presence of the Father and the Mother. Then shall all mysteries be made known unto us. Then shall we also become as They are and receive of Them all things. 
48 But it is also in this thing that they do every day whereby the Nem are counseled and instructed by their kindred dead. For, they whom we call dead are not dead at all, and they do walk upon the Way. And the Nem do not say, “We go to the other side,” or “We go unto the World of Spirits,” for they know that that place and this are the same world, worlds without end. Wherefore, when their hearts are turned to the fathers, the hearts of the fathers are turned even unto them, such that they do walk and talk with the children of their bodies even unto distant generations. 
49 Now, we esteem this to be good, for that they who have passed from this life into the next yet have much that they might teach they who walk and sojourn in the mortal body. Yea, they have lived their lives and learned much. Wherefore, we esteem it good to cleave upon this wisdom and make application of it in our lives. 
50 But behold, if we wish to go the full measure, it is to stand in the presence of the Peacemaker, even He who made this life possible for us, unto which we aspire. But, in order that we might the more fully prepare ourselves to receive so great a blessing, we work diligently upon the Way, having our kindred to be our instructors. 
51 And many there are who are so accomplished in this manner of meditation that they find access to the Way with ease and in any circumstances. They are blessed exceedingly, but such is not the way with me. 
52 Behold, I am filled still with images of times past and they haunt me. Wherefore, to walk upon the Way I must make a ceremony that does focus my thinking and my feeling upon other, more sacred things. And this is the manner of my ceremony: 
53 Behold, I lay down my pallet in a solitary place. Yea, in a lonely and solitary place I do prepare my resting place. It is for this purpose that I built a tower upon the side of the hill which looks down upon Elak Kowa, the place where I do make my abode. And I do lay down a pallet prayerfully upon the floor of the uppermost chamber of the tower. 
54 And the pallet is made of woven reeds and it does represent unto me the world upon which I place my feet. And upon this pallet I do place a beautiful blanket. This blanket does represent unto me the Way. And I do spread the pallet and the blanket before me such that they extend from the East unto the West and I place my bundle in the center thereof, and I sit myself upon the East thereof. This is the altar of my meditation and my prayers are my sacrifice upon the altar. 
55 And when I open my bundle it is to pray and to meditate and to walk upon the Way. And sometimes I open my bundle to celebrate the good things of the earth. But, for the most part, it is to pray and to meditate and to walk upon the Way that I do open the sacred bundle. 
56 And the bundle of my prayer is made of finely prepared hide of the kirlu, which is a blithe and comely beast found in profusion upon the hills and mountains of the Valley of Mentina. And the hair of the hide is removed therefrom and the skin is bleached and prepared and is very fine and soft. 
57 This breech represents the garment placed upon the First Man and the First Woman by the Lord when He taught them the Law of Chastity, and it signifies to me the manner in which the Peacemaker does prepare the rough and coarse thing that is man in order that he might stand in His presence. Yea, bleached and whitened, softened and prepared, we do stand before the Creator of all things and the Finisher of all things. Wherefore, I do work the skin of one kirlis and I prepare it and it is the covering of my prayer bundle. 
58 And within the bundle are found the articles with which I do make an oblation unto the Lord. And the articles are wrapped in the kirlum. And within the kirlum they are wrapped in red cloth. Yea, in red they are wrapped and placed within packets made of the skin of the kurlis and they are placed within the kirlum. And these are placed within the prayer bundle. 
59 And, when the bundle is opened, it is done with great reverence and with prayer. Yea, I do beseech the Holy Ghost in mighty prayer and in song to be present as I open the bundle. And I do open the kirlum in which the articles of the bundle are kept and I do lay the red cloth out from the East unto the West in the center of the bundle. 
60 And these are the articles which I place in the prayer bundle. Behold, I place the bowl of a pipe which I have made with my own hands, as also the stem of the pipe, within the kirlum. And the bowl of the pipe is made such that it contains a square, and this represents the straitness of the way which leads unto the Peacemaker. It is the sign of the square. And the bowl of the pipe is made of stone, even from among the first created, and it is carved of my own hand. And when I take it out, I do lay it upon its covering. 
61 And the stem of my pipe is straight and strong, and it is made of a wood that is known by the healers of Mentina to give a berry, the seed of which is useful in strengthening the heart. Yea, and this tree does bear thorns which are like, it is said, unto the crown which the Peacemaker bore upon His head in the day that He was taken by the world and subjected unto death. It is also said to represent the pointer of the Liahona which our fathers Lehi and Nephi took with them into the wilderness. Therefore, it is the sign of the compass, and it is this wood that I used to fashion the stem of my pipe. 
62 And when I place the red cloth upon the kirlum, I do also place the stem of the pipe upon this cloth. This is to signify that I place my heart upon that road or that path which leads unto Him and that I do dedicate my life and my sacrifice unto Him, even as He did dedicate His life and His sacrifice unto me. 
63 And I also have a multicolored shell that is the size of my hand which I use as my bowl of incense. And the use of this bowl is described in another place. The multicolored shell signifies my thanks for the multitude of blessings for which I do offer up my oblation and my sacrifice. 
64 Yea, for the Peacemaker speaks peace unto my soul and were it not for this peace, I know not that I could stand the length of the day. For, the sun looks down upon all my transgressions and my sins, and if the sun may see me all the day long, then why not my God? And I know not that I could live with the agony of my deeds were it not for the peace which my Lord does speak unto my soul. 
65 And this peace cannot be described in one color. For, it is not the rising or setting of the sun, but it is much more. And it is not encompassed by all the learning of the wise men, but it is much more. And it cannot be encompassed by the whole earth, for it is too great. And it cannot be fathomed, for it is as deep as a soul. Wherefore, I describe this peace in the color of the shell, which is all colors at once, and yet all colors singly. 
66 And when I take out the bowl of incense, I do place it upon its own kirlum upon the bundle. 
67 And I do keep sacred essences within the bundle for use as oblations. And they are kept within their own kirlum and are placed thereon upon the bundle. And these essences contain sacred and healing herbs and also the blood of healing of significant trees. And these are used as the smoke of incense when I open the prayer bundle. 
68 And also within the bundle I keep a cord of green with which I do gird myself, and a shawl of many colors with which I do cover myself, when I open the prayer bundle. And this is also in accordance with that which has been recorded in another place, even in Oug’s Book of the High Place. 
69 And I do open the prayer bundle in a sacred manner, even with much song and mighty prayer. And I take of the precious essences and I do purify all the articles of the bundle, as also myself, with a sweet and purifying odor. And this does signify how sweet and purifying is my walk and my talk with the Peacemaker, my Lord. 
70 And when I have made a song of thanksgiving and a purifying ordinance, I take up the bowl of the pipe and I unite it with the stem of the pipe. And this signifies that I do unify my soul with the Peacemaker and that I do aspire to be sealed up His. 
71 And I do fill the bowl of the pipe with sacred herb and I make a ceremony of Sacred Breath. And this is the manner of the ceremony: 
72 Because I do desire that the Great and Heavenly Father might be with me, I do raise the pipe in offering to the heavens and I sing for the guidance of the Holy Ghost. 
73 And, because I do desire that the Great and Heavenly Mother might be with me, I do raise the pipe in offering and touch it to the bundle and I sing for the guidance of the Holy Ghost. 
74 And I do raise the pipe in offering toward the West and pray for all the good things of the earth and all wisdom in the application of them. And I do sing for the guidance of the Holy Ghost. 
75 And I do raise the pipe in offering toward the North and pray for the presence of Heavenly Beings in my life. And I do sing for the guidance of the Holy Ghost. 
76 And I do raise the pipe in offering toward the East and pray for the visitation of my kindred dead and for the gifts of the Spirit. And I do sing for the guidance of the Holy Ghost. 
77 And I do raise the pipe in offering toward the South and I pray for the strength and the will to repent of my deeds. And I do sing for the guidance of the Holy Ghost. 
78 And I do touch the bowl of the pipe to my own heart and describe a circle with the pipe in offering. This I do in order that I might remind myself of the sacred covenant I have made to my people, that we may be of one heart and one mind and have all things in common. 
79 Then I do smoke the sacred herb and blow the smoke in the four directions. 
80 And behold, it is in this sacred breath that I do cease to be harrowed up by the past, and I find peace enough to go upon the Way. For in thanksgiving only, am I able to be still and know God. 
81 Now, this has also become a pattern with those who do not use the Sacred Pipe, but prefer to use the Bowl of Incense instead, as is described in the archives. And this is the preference of most women among the Nem of Mentina. 


CHAPTER 10 
1 Now, I am one who must set aside more than simply the things of the world in order to find that stillness that must be acquired if one wishes to walk upon the Way. Yea, I have seen and done things that in moments of war must be justified by the mind of man, that the work of death might go forward. And behold, this is a thing that prevents the mind and the heart from finding that stillness that is needed to walk upon the Way, and it is the reason that hardly shall any man of war be admitted there. 
2 And there are many such distractions in our daily walk that might prove to be an impediment to us all. Wherefore, it is expedient to choose that way of life that will most effectively remove from our minds the clamor and the noise of daily living, that we might choose a better thing. 
3 It is for this cause that the Lord led our forefathers out of the Land Southward. For they saw in the Nephite way of living an obstacle to the continuation of peace. Yea, the Nephites did begin to lust after the things of the world and to gather to themselves all manner of riches. This did quickly become an obstacle to them and a stumbling block. 
4 And we cannot discern any difference in their manner of living and their manner of worship in the end. In every thing they did seek to heap up rewards and to deliver punishments, both at home and in the synagogues. This is a thing most ruinous to a nation. 
5 But the Nem do choose a better way and, because of this choice, they have no impediment that may not be overcome. Yea, their manner of worship does remind them everyday that their peace does come out of the sacrifice of every member of the community. And they feel no need to heap reward upon each other for their goodness, for the Lord does abundantly reward them out of the natural consequences of their choices. And they have no need of punishment or coercion in their dealings with their fellows, for they esteem all people equally and do not set themselves up as the judge of their brother’s worthiness. 
6 Yea, the Nem do exercise great faith at home and in the synagogue and their every action does serve to remind them of the nature of the creation and also their part and duty in it. 
7 The purification of the Ammonites is practiced among the Nem, but it has become an ordinance that is practiced more often by men than by women. For, it is expedient that men learn the way of sacrifice, even to the extent that they may make a living sacrifice for the sake of all living. Women do make this sacrifice by and through their very creation and nature. Wherefore, it is not expedient for them, howbeit, there are those who do participate in it. But the men must find living ways to learn this manner of sacrifice and they set their feet upon this path by and through the ordinance passed down to us from our forefathers. 
8 And this purification does cleanse the body of evils that can inhibit the spirit. That which this purification does cast out of the body does often contribute to clouding the mind and this can become an obstacle to obtaining that inner peace that is required in order that one might walk upon the Way. 
9 And the men and women of the Nem do use those ceremonies in which the use of sacred and healing smoke is employed. This kind of purification does also help the mind and the body find peace. And they also use ordinances and ceremonies which do utilize the essences of plants, even the pure essences of them, and this does have effect upon the body and the spirit in many ways beneficial to the attaining of that state of mind necessary to walk upon the Way. 
10 And behold, the Nem do also fast often with their families. And this they do not in the sight of others, but they do it secretly. And they do not communicate their fasting to others, to be seen of them, but they do it often and in private. 
11 And also the ordinances of the High Place do cause a change in the character and countenances of the people. For, in them they are introduced into the Terrestrial World and this does remind them of their purpose. 
12 And behold, because of the nature of the Nem way of life, even the Law of Consecration, men and women are constantly reminded of their purpose. For, it is certain that, as men and women serve each other and work diligently to shoulder the burdens of their fellows, their burdens are indeed lifted. And this applies to their physical burdens and to their spiritual burdens equally. 
13 For, it is very often the carnal burdens that do create obstacles and impediments to attaining to that peace that does allow us to walk upon the Way, and to live as the Nem do relieves many of these burdens. The relief of the earthly does often cause an enlightening. And, in addition to the obvious physical blessing of our way of life, we do also enjoy much spiritual liberty because of it. 
14 Now, what man may not admit that in the midst of strife and worry over the getting of gain, there is burden? And who will deny that such a striving does not begin to consume every hour of the day and every thought and feeling of the heart? It is entirely true and proved daily. Or what beggar does not spend all his day begging and wondering when he shall next eat and where he shall next lay down his head to rest? And what father of the Nephites had any time to contemplate anything greater than bringing in the crop? And, in the end, did he not hurry in all things so that the Gadiantons could not make away with his living? 
15 Behold, the Nem are not bound up in such worries and such pursuits. Because we provide in all things for one another, there are no beggars. And because we do not heap up riches, we are not desired by the Gadiantons. And this is a great blessing to us. 
16 And because our men and our women do not strive day by day against nature simply to live, they have time to contemplate the beauty of nature. And, because we are not set upon by our neighbors in competition for our goods, we have leisure to enjoy the company of our fellows. And because we have a surplus, we also have time to give thought to the blessings and wonders of creation and to approach our God. 
17 Is this not ample proof that the Nem way is good and to be recommended to bring about happiness? 


CHAPTER 11 
1 Now, when I had filled the seat of high priest of Mentina for the space of twenty and five years, the people of the city numbered too many and the land became burdened. Yea, and the people did begin to take too much from the land and from the mountains, and they began to hurt the land. Wherefore, it was determined in the Councils that the residents must split up and divide into smaller communities. But there was some strife in deciding who would go and who would stay. 
2 For, many of the families of Mentina had lived in the city for many generations and they loved their city. Wherefore, it did come to pass that some refused any method of determining who might go and who might stay. And they denied the right and authority of the Council to make such determination. Yea, and it did seem that the people were about to experience contention and dissent in the city. 
3 But, I would exhort you to consider the rights of the people of the city. Did the Council have authority to decide who must go and who must stay? Or what power does the Council have over the people of Mentina if no complaint of injury against any person has been placed before them? I say to you, they have none. Wherefore, the Council did attempt to take up authority from the people to which they were not entitled. And this thing did cause much strife in all the city and much dissension. 
4 And it became my duty, as high priest of the city, to ask the people to recommend what action must be taken. And the people decided to dissolve the Council of Mentina and called a Council of Mothers to elect a new Community Council. And this decision was accepted by the Council of Mentina and the members did stand down. 
5 And the Mothers of all the families of the city and the environs round about it over which the city held sway, did meet together and they did prayerfully consider names. And they did nominate twelve people to recommend to the people. But behold, the people did not elect all of those nominated and the Council was not filled. Wherefore, the Mother’s Council did meet again to consider names and they did nominate seven and recommended them to the people. And behold, only three of them were elected by the people. And the Mothers met again and nominated four more and the people did elect them. 
6 And the Peli Council did also meet and compiled a list of all the names of the greatest Healers in the community and did send the list to the new Council of Mentina. And the Council did elect from the list of names one person and she became the Talking Feather of the Council. 
7 And these are the names of the men and women who sat on the Council of Mentina before the election: Ayimlekt, Shi-Tosinlit, Nephi-Im, Pa Parim, Shi-Melek, Shi-Echinmet, Shi-Panishim, Pa Torieth, Hemnietem-Im, Phahorem, Pa Penith, and Mentineth. 
8 And they did step down from the Council. 
9 And these are the names of the men and women who were elected by the people: Ayimlekt, Shi-Tosinlit, Temnet, Pa Parim, Shi-Melek, Shi-Echinmet, Shi-Panishim, Pamath, Ishimemet, Pa Mentina, Pa Penith, and Hemeniet. 
10 And the Council chose Natanhim to be the Talking Feather. 
11 And behold, when the Council of Mentina met, they too determined that the population of the city had grown too great and that the city must be depopulated. But they did not seek ways whereby the people might determine who must go and who must stay. They counseled the denizens only upon the great peril to their city and to the environment around it should they not reduce the burden upon the land and did not seek to take up authority to act upon the matter. 
12 And the people of the city did begin to assemble together and discuss the matter, and many made preparations to take their stewardships to another place and to create a new city. And this was after the designs of my heart, for I desired that the people make the decision themselves. For, if the ways of the Nem are to be preserved, the people must do it, and my heart was gladdened that the people of Mentina discerned the risk, both to their good land, but also to their ways and customs, and they did correct themselves in the right way. 
13 Now, there were cities in that place where Hagoth and his little band of sojourners first made their settlement, which had been all but abandoned because they did not heed the earth’s warning. Yea, the people of that city refused to leave when they had grown too large and they did entirely use up the good of the land. And behold, they were forced to leave all at once and in haste, abandoning home and shop, barn and field. And they left behind them ghostly and empty cities wherein only a few lonesome people now live. 
14 Behold, I say to you, this would have been the fate of Mentina. For, the land may bear only so many souls without hurt. And when the land we walk upon is hurt, she does not give of her bounty. Shall any city do this in this fair land you shall see want and hunger. Yea, you shall see drought and famine. And young men shall do hurt and young women also. 
15 And this they did even to the utter collapse of their cities in the land where the great river turns to the north, where our fathers set up their first place of settlement. And behold, this was not just one city, but many, and they all collapsed seemingly at once because they would not divide and walk gently upon the earth. Yea, and they did continue to cut down the trees for their houses and their fuel. And, when the snow melted in the spring, the water ran out of control into the canyons and was taken away. Wherefore, there was nothing for the crops when the sun did beat down upon them. 
16 And behold, the soil also was carried away by the spring running and also be the summer winds. And there remained not enough to nourish the crops through the season and they failed. And the people did use up their surplus hoping that the next year would be better, or that there would be rain, or that the snows would not run so swiftly from off the mountains. But behold, there was no change and they all became beggars and, like beggars, they did all put their things upon their backs and they left the place of their habitation and came even into other cities of the Nem for refuge. 
17 Now, this was a complete collapse of their society and of their cities. They did not stray one by one out of the place of their habitation. Rather, they left all at once leaving behind home and hearth. 
18 Now the streets of their cities and settlements are left empty and the dogs gambol in the alleyways. Their gardens wither and their vines do not give fruit, for there is none to tend them. Their houses stand as testimony against them and the voice of laughter and singing is not heard in their synagogues. 
19 There is no provender in the storehouse and those very few who remained continue to seek the succor of their neighbors until they too may leave in safety. 
20 Yea, Zion is left desolate because of the intentions of the Nem of that region. 
21 Their granaries are barren and their cisterns are dry. Their vats press out no wine and the Nem wander in search of what help they may find in the desert places. 
22 The wind sings through the streets and only wild animals enjoy their avenues. The lonely sound of their empty cities call out to the traveler and cause him to turn the foot from its ghostly welcome. 
23 For the Nem of that region have all left their homes and come unto other places. They have come away all at once and have left nothing behind them but their memories. 
24 Behold, this shall be the future of all the Nem, should they fail to keep the commandments of God and follow Him in His paths. Yea, if the people cease to strive with God, He shall cease to strive with them. Or, shall He reveal unto us the ways in which we might live peaceably with our fellows, and also with the earth, and we turn from that revelation? And, if we do, what shall be the outcome? Shall we not reap that which we sow because we are Nem? Are the Nem so favored of the Lord that He will ignore us when we disobey His voice and give no heed to His counsel? 
25 For, we do rely upon the Lord to cause the rain to fall upon our crops. And we do believe Him when He says that He is the font of living water. And shall we use up the good of the earth before His very face and cry to Him for protection? Shall we lift up our stiff necks and praise Him? Or shall we raise ourselves up on a pillar and cry unto Him, that all might see us? Are we so favored that the decree of the Lord concerning this land shall no longer be esteemed by the Nem? 
________________


26 The Lord of the Harvest has established this place as a land flowing with milk and honey. Shall we throw it in His face and tread upon His counsel? If we do, we shall do it to our peril. For, who can follow the Lord in this thing and yet set that thing aside for another time and another people? Shall we choose out from among the revelations this one or that one to which we shall take heed? Or shall we set one set of books aside and esteem them of no value? 
27 Shall any people rely upon their own counsel and set aside the counsel of God, they shall surely be left alone to reap their reward. For, the Lord gives of His bounty freely unto they who will listen unto His voice. And He shall even bless them that know not His voice, but do well. But, unto that people who know His voice and openly defy Him, He shall not pour out a blessing upon them and the earth shall not give of her generosity. And it matters not what such a people call themselves, be it Mentinite, or Witchitite, or Nespelite, or Nephite, or Lamanite, or Levite, they shall all be the same who tread upon the counsels of the Lord God. 
28 Now behold, the valley called Meninta, wherein lies the city of Mentina, is not so unlike to the valley called Hagoth that we might enjoy a different fate should we do as the Nem of Hagoth did. Yea, our valley shall not be filled with fields and meadows and our mountains crowned with great towering trees, if we fail to walk gently upon the land. Yea, our streams and our springs shall dry up also, should we do the same, and our beautiful garden place shall become a desert and wither. 
29 And behold, what became of those cities in the place of Hagoth’s first habitation in this Land Northward, shall become of all they who gather into multitudes of people too large for the land to bear. Yea, the land shall carry them only so long, even as an ass does bow under his load. But load the ass too heavily and push him too harshly and he will kick off his burden and run away from you. So too shall this fair land kick off her burden and turn her face from us. 
CHAPTER 12 
1 And when the people had heard the words of the Council, they did of their own will divide themselves equitably and some stayed in Mentina and others did remove a day’s journey from it and establish a new city. And this new city was also larger than that which the people had decided was the limit which the earth could bear in that place and others did continue on to another place to establish their home. And thus they did until all the people had moved southward in large enough intervals that they would not press too greatly upon the land and overrun her ability to provide for them. 
2 And even our own Elak Kowa became too large and my son did take his family and several of the young men into the north to make a community of their own. For, he desired that his wife and children should live yet a little closer to the Nem of Nespelem. 
3 And behold, the Nem of my own city desired that I be called to be the high priest and to preside over them in their ordinances and celebrations. But I was still the high priest of Mentina and could not do duty to both at once. And my own city pressed me and desired me to serve in my own home and not go upon the road so often to Mentina to preside in the High Place there. 
4 For, the Nem of Elak Kowa had built the High Place in our own city and they had many synagogues also wherein they did study the books and the records. And they did meet together often in Councils established by the people. Yea, in all ways, the city of Elak Kowa had become a city exactly as Mentina, with all the same goings on, and the people declared their desire that I sit in the seat of high priest of the city. 
5 And the Council of Elak Kowa did send an epistle unto the Council of Mentina desiring them to release me from the seat of high priest, that I might more fully serve my own city. 


6 And behold, the Council of Mentina did take up the matter and prayerfully consider it. And, after much debate, the Council decided that I was not to be constrained to serve them for any reason, lest I be driven by such folly to take the course of Heinmet and resign the seat. 
7 Wherefore, I was released from the seat of high priest of the City of Mentina and my own city called me to preside. And I did become the high priest of Elak Kowa and I did no longer spend my time traveling to and from the City of Mentina. 
8 And behold, I did enjoy greater liberty than I had while laboring for the City of Mentina and it was my pleasure to use that time in teaching the men and women of my own city. For, many of the men were those Nephites who had come from out of the Nephite and Lamanite war and they had need of much counsel. Wherefore, I now had much more time to dedicate to their service. 
9 And Elak Kowa did grow and prosper, and many settlements did also grow up around it and we did spread ourselves upon the land north of the City of Mentina. 
10 And I did call and set up high priests unto all the settlements, which was a thing that had not been done very often. For, the high priest of Mentina did heretofore preside over all matters spiritual for all the cities round about the Valley of Mentina, but it was very difficult for the cities to receive of the high priest all that they needed. 
11 And this was also the case with the settlements that sprang up in the north part of the valley. Wherefore, rather than that they should come always unto me in Elak Kowa for all their needs, I did establish high priests for them in their Lodges. 
12 And I did cause that they should call teachers and priests to instruct in the synagogues and to administer the ordinances of baptism and also the sacrament of the Lord’s supper unto the people. Now, these are they whom we call Peli. And they are men or women whom the community sees are of good heart and pure intention. And their names are given unto the high priest of the city for consideration for callings in the administration of such things. Wherefore, when a teacher or priest is needed for any of the synagogues, the high priest takes up the list of names which the Council has provided and inquires of the Lord as to who should be called. And, if the list contains not the name of that person whom the Lord sees fit to install, by the word of His commission unto the high priest, then the name of the candidate is given to the high priest through revelation. 
13 But behold, any person of good intention may officiate in the administration of the ordinances of baptism and of the sacrament of the Lord’s supper. And any person of good intention is equal to the task of leading the instruction of the people. For, they all do instruct their own children in their homes constantly and this does prepare all the Nem to become teachers and priests. 
14 And those ordinances which are done only in the home, such as the blessing and naming of children, blessing of the sick and the afflicted, the bestowal of the blessing whereby the people are reminded to receive the Holy Ghost, the ordinances of the High Place and all those things that must be taught at home to prepare for them, behold, all these things are administered by the parents of children or by the Peli, as each family shall choose and call for their edification. 
15 And behold, the Nem of Nespelem did begin to administer the bread and wine of the Lord’s supper every time they met together to be instructed of the teachers and priests. And this became a custom with us, to celebrate the covenant that the Lord made with the Father and with the Holy Ghost, every time we meet for any reason. 
16 Yea, when we gather to plant, we celebrate this sacrament, as also when we harvest. And when we build a house or a barn, we celebrate this sacrament. And when we meet a stranger on our way, we pause with them and welcome them, and we celebrate with them this sacrament. And behold, when any member of our family comes or goes away, we take time to celebrate this sacrament with them when they arrive from a journey or before the depart from us. 
17 And this we do in order that we may keep in our remembrance always that thing which the Lord has done for us. And we do it also that we may always have His spirit with us, or, in other words, that because we remember Him in all that we do, we might become in all ways like unto Him and take upon ourselves, and cultivate in ourselves that spirit wherewith He did teach us to govern our lives. 
18 But this is not all. When we do this, keeping the covenant which He made with the Father and with the Holy Ghost, we are made partakers of that covenant also. Therefore, if we have His spirit to be with us, and if we do govern ourselves by that spirit which we have received of Him, we shall also be assured of the covenant relationship with the Father and with the Holy Ghost that He also enjoys. 
19 For behold, it is by the power of the Father that we have our being. Yea, and because of the covenant which He made with the Mother, we have our lives and we are also partakers of that covenant. And it is by the power of the Holy Ghost that all things may be brought to our remembrance and be confirmed in us. Yea, by the power of the Holy Ghost we may become like our Father and Mother in Heaven. And it is because of the atonement which was accomplished by the Lord, even the Peacemaker, that we may come into communion with Heavenly Beings. Wherefore, we do participate as often as we can make excuse to do so in that covenant which they made together. 
20 And when we meet in formal assembly, which is our custom in the synagogues, we do not sit ourselves according to rank or calling, for there is no caste within the Nem but we are all servants. Yea, the synagogues are built in a circle or hoop fashion, as has been described in another place, and the priests and teachers sit in the center. And when they teach, they do stand in order that all may hear their words. But behold, they do not stand because they are above any other person in rank or caste. 
21 And when we meet, the priest leads the people in prayer, or asks that someone lead in prayer. For, when we come together in assembly, either for worship and oblation, or for councils, we do wish the Lord to be there with us. For it is expedient that we have the assistance and counsel of the Lord in all things, to help us with what we are about to do. Wherefore, we do pray first in earnest entreaty to have the Lord with us, and also the Holy Ghost. 
22 And also when we meet together in assembly we do sing songs of praise unto the Lord. Yea, we do lift up our voices in song and thanksgiving unto the Lord whenever we do assemble ourselves together. And whenever a new song is written, we ask our teachers to instruct us in it. For, the song of thanksgiving is a prayer unto the Lord and we know that the Lord does rejoice in our thanksgiving, for He has informed us that it is so. 
23 And when we have prayed for the presence of Heavenly Beings, and when we have all taken of the bread and wine of the Lord’s supper, the teacher stands and reads from the scriptures. And when this is done, the teacher sometimes expounds upon what has been read as the Spirit gives utterance. And also, if any person is moved upon by the Holy Ghost, they also stand in their place and speak the words which come to their hearts. But more often, the people take thought in that which has been read without much talking, for the Holy Ghost is a mighty instructor. 
24 And when this is all done, the teacher leads us in more song and the priest leads us once again in prayer. And the people embrace each other and the assembly is concluded. 
25 And this is the custom among all the Nem when they meet in assembly together. And behold, the priests and teachers assist us always in our understandings and in our oblations. 
26 Now, it is the priest who is given the charge and the stewardship of the care and keeping of the synagogue, and this does often take away from the time necessary for the priest to labor for the support of the family and for the creating of surplus. And the Nem do not begrudge the priest anything that is required in order to maintain the synagogue in good order. Wherefore, the people all do give of their surplus to the priest because of the labor which is required on the part of the people. And no priest is ever left in a state of want, for this would be the shame and the dishonor of the people. 
27 But the teachers are not asked to do more than the people themselves do in order to fulfill the stewardship that has been placed upon them. Wherefore, they are not made beggars by their stewardship and make no entreaty because of it. 
28 And there is always a font of water kept at the synagogue in readiness for any who might wish to be baptized. And this font is kept clean and the water is kept fresh each day. And when any person desires to renew the covenant which they have made with the Lord, and the people do this often, they come to the priest and ask for the ordinance. Or they bring with them that member of their family who does act as Peli for them in this ordinance and the priest leads them in it in a sacred manner. 
29 And when a sojourner or a stranger first arrives in the city, they go unto the priest and make themselves known. And their needs are made known to the priest first, and also their intention. And the priest takes their petition to the high priest immediately, and their want is fulfilled out of the storehouse of the city. Then, once care is taken to assure that they do not want for their physical needs, they may make their introduction to the Council and, if it is their intention to stay and become part of the community, they receive their stewardship from the Council. 
30 Wherefore, the Nem are careful to maintain that the priest of the synagogue always has somewhat of a surplus to care for the wayfarer and the stranger. And they also bring as much of their surplus as they cannot keep adequately themselves to the storehouses of the city, that there be no waste of the surplus of the people. And this is kept in good order by the high priest of the city and those the Council calls to assist in this labor as part of their stewardship. But behold, all that can be adequately kept in the homes of the Nem, they do keep themselves and they do administer it to the needy. 
31 But neither the priest of the synagogue nor the high priest are left without that which is needed to immediately assist the stranger, the visitor, or the wayfarer. For, it is oft the case that such is their state that the wayfarer arrives in the city in desperate need and the priest is called upon to assist with haste. Wherefore, we always maintain that the priest, whom we call to be a shepherd to the people and a servant, has a store of that which is needed to be of speedy assistance. 
32 Behold, I am reminded of the day that I did arrive in Mentina from the Nephite wars. I and my companions whom I had gathered along the way were in desperate need of assistance. And behold, because of the custom of the Nem, we had no need of making our petition to the Council, but rather, our needs were immediately met by the priest of the synagogue. For, the first person to see us approaching the city ran out to greet us and, seeing that we were desperate from our long journey and hungry, took us directly to the priest. 
33 And the priest of the synagogue nearest to the southern approach to the city, for this is the direction in which we did arrive in Mentina, having crossed a great desert and traversed the mountains, was a woman of great spirit and presence of mind. And the Nem had made sure that she had a store of those things most required by the wayfarer. And she did take us in without question or interview, and she did succor us and give us that which we most required, being a place to wash ourselves, sound food and medicine with wine to revive us, and a place to lay ourselves down to rest. And when we were revived, for we were in sore want, she administered the sacrament of the Lord’s supper with us and revived our spirits as well. Then did we go up unto the Council and give our report of the war and its outcome. 
34 Now, this is a good custom. For we were desperate for assistance, having come from afar off. And behold, we were strangers in a strange city. And our appearance was exceedingly rough. Yea, we did appear as vagabonds straight from who might know what mischief. But, because of the custom of the people, no one was called upon to judge our intention. The Nem took care of our immediate needs first. For, it is also the custom that newcomers come unto the Council to introduce themselves and it is the stewardship of the Council to ascertain one’s intentions. 
35 But behold, it is the stewardship of every individual to feed the hungry and clothe the naked. And it is the calling of each man and woman to give rest to the weary and to lift up the hands that hang down. This is the commission of every man or woman which is given unto them of Jesus Christ, who is the Peacemaker. Above all other stewardships that might be given of men, this one stewardship is given of the Lord and the Nem need no commandment or reminder in it. They do assure that all who come wanting into their cities are cared for speedily. 
36 For, are we not all wayfarers? Do we not all travel together the road upon which our Lord has placed us? And can we say that this road is always pleasant and never rough? Or is it true that we always go upon our way knowing exactly what will become of us or how our journey will fare? Can any of us predict one day to the next with certainty? 
37 I say unto you, Nay. For we have not all things before us and cannot see the end from the beginning. And if we are all wayfarers, it is good to remember that we may at time fare ill in our journey and require speedy assistance to save our very lives. If this be the case with us, how can we begrudge our substance to any other? Yea, and how can we, who have plenty and to spare, fail to make preparations before the time of need to provide for them who have not? Because we are blind to all that might befall us, is it not wisdom to make preparations? 
38 But behold, it is a peculiar thing among the Nem that we do make preparations not for ourselves, but it is for others that we make preparation, yea, we do it to be of service to our neighbor. For, what good would our surplus be to him that immediately needs if he must first find us who have made preparation to make his entreaty? For immediate aid, such a thing would profit no one. Wherefore, we put up in store in order that no petition may go up unheard and unheeded, nay, not even for a moment. 
39 Now, all the commissions given of Christ for to fulfill His purposes are called by us the Priesthood of God. Yea, it is by His commission that priests and teachers are called to assist us and to attend to the synagogues. And it is by His commission that the high priest sees to the management of the High Place and of the surplus of the city and its keeping. And it is by His commission that mothers and fathers do teach their children and also the stranger in their house. And it is by His commission that families do sometimes assign Peli with a special calling to assist them with the ordinances and the sacrifices. Behold, the commission of the Lord is the priesthood and it is the responsibility of every person to obtain it. 
40 The priest is not the priesthood. Nay, and the high priest is not the priesthood. It is that specific word of God that comes to the individual by and through the Holy Ghost that conveys the commission to the heart and soul of a man or a woman. 
41 And behold, when this commission is come into the soul of a person, they come to the priest or the high priest, or to the Peli of a family, and they request a blessing of them to confirm by token and by the laying on of hands of that which has been received of the Lord. And the priest, the high priest or the Peli shall give whatever words of prophecy or counsel to which the Holy Ghost may give utterance, and this becomes a witness and an assistance to the individual in fulfilling that commission whereby the Lord has called them. 
42 And if the high priest does call upon a person from out of the names provided by the people to be a priest or teacher unto them, they may not take up the calling until they have sought the confirmation of the Holy Ghost that they have received the commission of the Lord in it. And if they receive not this confirmation, they do not accept the call, but they do ask the high priest to go again unto the Lord in prayer to affirm the matter. 
43 Behold, the priesthood of God is a serious matter to the Nem and we do not trifle with it. It is not given to any person without the clear and certain commission of the Lord. And this commission comes to a person by and through the power of the Holy Ghost. 
44 Now, there is nothing that the is necessary for the salvation of the soul that the Lord might command that differs from the covenant that He did enter into with the Father and with the Holy Ghost. Wherefore, women, having already received the saving grace and commission of the Mother, already possess the priesthood of God. But behold, they must also receive a confirmation of the calling before taking it up for the Lord. 
45 But men have not this grace from their birth and must receive it from the Peacemaker. This is why the Nem do confer upon those men who are called of God, the priesthood after the orders thereof. And they are ordained to the offices that are assigned thereto by the laying on of hands after that they have received the commission. Behold, only they who have received the commission of the Lord to do so may confer or ordain by the laying on of hands. 
46 Whereas, women are called to the office with a holy calling and a blessing by the laying on of hands as a token of the commission only. For they have the priesthood already conferred upon them and shall anyone confer that which is already given? 
47 And how shall anyone know that they have truly received the commission and that they do act according to word and will of the Lord? Behold, they do not set themselves up or apart from their neighbors. Nay, they do not wear special attire which sets them apart. And they do not set a mark of any kind upon themselves to give them distinction, that all might look and see that they possess the priesthood of God. 
48 It is the responsibility of every person to seek the confirmation of the Holy Ghost that any person has the right to speak and act in the name of God. And this is done every time an ordinance that requires the commission of the Lord is to be performed. Behold, the participants shall fast and pray, and if they receive not the confirmation that the right individual has been chosen to perform the ordinance, they return again to fasting and prayer. 
49 Behold, these things are of such import that they are never rushed into. And if the confirmation of the Holy Ghost is not received, the person is not judged worthy or unworthy. It is merely that they have not the commission of the Lord in that thing at that time. For, the priesthood of God is not a thing that is given to all and all at once. It is a thing that must be cultivated and cared for throughout one’s life. 
50 Yea behold, I may receive the commission on one day and then on the next I may be found in anger against my neighbor. In that moment I have lost the commission of the Lord. It is only after I have repented and made good my error that the commission returns unto me. Therefore, the priesthood becomes a constant reminder to each individual of the determinate need to be in constant harmony with the Lord in all things. It is in this way that the Lord uses the priesthood to teach and to train us to become like Him in all things. 
51 And so great is the import of this principle that it has been revealed and written that no man may take up this honor unto himself, but that he is called of God as was Aaron, the brother of Moses the prophet. 
52 Now, Aaron was called up to the office of high priest unto his people by the mouth of a prophet of God. But do you suppose that this was done without Aaron’s having received any intelligence of it? Nay, believe it not, for I say unto you that Aaron did inquire of the Lord in the matter. And, after that he had spent much time and effort in repenting of his faults and his errors, the Lord did convey unto him through the power of the Holy Ghost the commission to do all that the prophet called him to do. 
53 And Moses and Aaron were sons of Levi and they did answer the call of the Lord and they did act according to the commission of the Lord. Therefore, they did possess the priesthood and were justified in all that they did in righteousness. 
54 Does that mean that they were justified in all things because they had the priesthood of God? I say unto you, Nay. Behold how neither of them were allowed to go down into the promised land but were taken from the earth before the children of Israel received their inheritance. 
55 Wherefore, take heed all you who would claim to possess the right and power to speak and act in the name of Jesus Christ, the Peacemaker. Yes, have a care what you do and say in His name. For, if you seek not to be commissioned in all things and in all times, the priesthood shall be a thing of naught in you and, though you claim to have received it by ordinance after a set pattern, you shall speak the name of the Lord in vain and you shall lay upon Him actions that are not His. Behold, you shall sow great confusion in the day that you do this. Yea, a generation may go into confusion before the Lord will correct your evil. 


CHAPTER 13 
1 It is written that Noah did plant for himself a vineyard, for he was an husbandman. And he did harvest the fruit of his vine and he did make of it pure wine. And when he did drink of his wine he became drunken with it and he went into his tabernacle for to sleep. 
2 And behold, his son Ham did enter into the tent and he did see his father’s nakedness. And when he had done this thing, he did return out of the tent. And when his brethren discovered the act, they did the opposite of their brother Ham and they did walk with their father’s raiment upon their shoulders, being chaste. Yea, they obtained all the teaching of their father and they were priests and prophets to their people. 
3 And Noah did curse his son Ham and he was denied the thing that is most to be desired, even that which allows a man to gain access to heavenly beings and to emerge from out of this clay and set aside the beast. For, this is that heritage which might have been sufficient to correct in Ham that aberration of character which led him into unnatural love. But Ham, being caught up in the carnal lust of his heart, knew not what he had lost. 
4 And Pharaoh, his grandson, though he was reported to be a righteous man and a righteous king, nevertheless he did preserve a heritage of wickedness because of that thing of his father’s that he chose to continue. Surely he did no injury to his fellowman. But he was caught up in the carnality to which his grandfather fell prey. Behold, this is the curse that was preserved by Pharaoh and by Egyptus, for through them this same curse continued. 
5 And behold, the scriptures assure us that Pharaoh desired what he thought to be the right of priesthood, but he was denied because of the curse which he had helped to preserve. And all his descendents who would not repent of this evil, were also denied the commission of the Lord. 
6 For, it is only through the bonding together of the unique endowment of power of the mother and of the father that we may hope to become as our Father and Mother in Heaven. And it is only by emerging out of this telestial into a terrestrial sphere that we may be more fully instructed by angels, the spirits of just men and women made perfect, and by the Lord Himself. 
7 And behold, it would have been for Pharaoh just as it is for any man. If we want to become like our Lord, then we must do what he does. Yea, we must receive of Him the commission to do His work and His will, subduing the flesh. Verily, this is priesthood. But we are commissioned to do the Lord’s work only upon the principle of revelation by and through the unspeakable gift of the Holy Ghost. 
8 Wherefore, because Pharaoh took up again the sin of his fathers, and also of Egyptus, the Lord denied him His commission and he had no right of priesthood. And, though he ruled his people well and was a righteous king, yet he subdued not his own flesh. In this he did also deny the Lord’s commission to his whole generation and his entire nation. 
9 Behold, this is the Gospel of Jesus Christ, that we should all come unto the knowledge of the Son, and unto His wisdom, and His stature as a son of God. Yea, this is the will of the Lord – that all might emerge out of what we now are into that which we must become, if we are to be the sons and daughters of God in more than mere words only. Yea, and the commission of the Lord is priesthood. 
10 He may give unto us authority to convey this gospel to all the world and to confer priesthood upon everyone. But without the commission received by the gift of revelation, the conferring of priesthood is as the sound of a drum, beautiful but not lasting. And when the sound of the drumbeat is gone, what is left of priesthood but memory. 
11 Behold, it is also written of another Noah who was a King among the Nephites. And he did confer priesthoods upon his favorites. And behold, even though they claimed the priesthood and the authority of God, they did commit whoredoms in the sight of the people. 
12 Wherefore, is priesthood in the conferring? Or is it in ordination that the right of priesthood is transmitted unto men? I say unto you, Nay. For there was one among them whom the Lord took to Himself after that he had repented. Yea, unto Alma the Lord did reveal Himself and He did give him His commission. Then had Alma priesthood indeed, not by the word and will of a king, but by the word and will of God. 
13 Observe these two Noahs and remember the instruction. For they being dead do continue to teach us still. 
14 Noah, our father of old, conveyed unto his righteous sons all that he could, but they did receive of the Lord according to their own commitment. Noah could not have bestowed anything upon that son who sinned in his heart. 
15 Noah, the wicked Nephite king conveyed all that he could of his own unto those whom he chose, but they could receive nothing of the Lord because of their lack of commitment to His will. King Noah could bestow nothing lasting and eternal upon any man, though he possessed all the authority of a kingdom. 
16 Oh man! Never think yourself too big. Puff not yourself up in the pride of your heart! Do you think that you can lay hands upon any person and convey unto them that which is not yours to convey? Know that the laying on of hands is only the physical token of the priesthood. But nothing at all is conveyed except by and through the commission received directly from the Peacemaker by personal revelation. 
17 Wherefore, we may perform the ordinances but they are hollow without revelation. Yea, we may preach and teach, but our words are false if we are not on the Lords errand and under His commission. And we may confer upon men the priesthood, but only in empty words and meaningless phrases without the direction of the Lord. And we may wash and anoint, but for what purpose? We are filthy still without the word and will of the Lord. And shall we stand together and declare ourselves the Friends of Christ and that our calling is made sure? Behold, I say unto you, Not without that the Lord Himself does stand up to declare it with us. 


18 All else is dross. Yea, I speak clearly that you might understand clearly. If anyone teaches ought of priesthoods and authorities more than these things, they instruct in vanities. Yea, they utter falsehoods. Their teaching is a Jaguar woven in cloth. 
19 Let not language determine what is priesthood and what is not. Priesthood is not the man. Nay, nor is it his calling or his station. It is the commission of Christ. And if a man has received the commission of Christ and the Holy Ghost confirms, then you may know with a surety that it is done unto him by revelation. And if the commission has been received by revelation, then let that man be ordained, for he possesses priesthood already. Yea, he is a priest unto his God, wherefore, let him be ordained. 
20 And it is according to the words of Christ which we did receive of Him directly when He did visit the Nem in the flesh, that all women have received the commission of the Mother. They too have priesthood already, wherefore, let them be called and ordained by the laying on of hands as a token of their covenant. Let them administer in all things wherein the Holy Ghost does direct. 
21 And behold, they may also receive the commission of the Peacemaker. Yea, and when they do, they are doubly blessed. Let them be administered to with an ordinance, and ordained and sustained and supported in their calling. 
22 Or shall we not all rejoice that the Lord does see fit to visit His people in righteousness? Shall we not raise our voices in thanksgiving and in praise? Shall we not be as happy and satisfied with the word and will of God that calls upon a woman to do His will, even as happy as we find ourselves to discover that He has called upon any man to administer for Him the works of salvation? Shall not both bring joy to us? Does not one testify of the goodness of God as well as the other? 


CHAPTER 14 
1 Now, it has been written in another place that, whereas men receive the priesthood by orders and His commission by the ordinances, women have received already that great gift wherewith the Mother did bless them. But still, even though they are empowered from before the foundation of the world, if they will do the works of the Peacemaker they will also work in His commission under those principles whereby He does govern His creation. 
2 And He has decreed that His creation shall operate upon certain laws and none may circumvent them. Wherefore, there is an order of priesthood given unto men whereby, if they receive the commission of Christ, they may do even the work and will of the Creator of heaven and earth. And if women receive also His commission, they may also do this same work. 
3 And there is an order of the priesthood which is preparatory, the beginning of faith, and another which it fulfills and finishes, the culmination of faith. And the preparatory priesthood is called after Levi, that son of Israel of old. And it is by and through this priesthood that Aaron did minister unto Moses and unto the people. 
4 And behold, the ordinances and covenants of this priesthood have for their purpose to bring the heart and the intention of the man to that point where he may set aside the things of the world and take up spiritual things. Yea, because of the preparation whereby the Lord does prepare the man, through this order of the priesthood, the man is able to lay down the natural man and step out of the telestial world. Indeed, by the ordinances and the covenants of this priesthood, the man may rend the veil that separates him from the Way. 
5 This order of priesthood has for its purpose to prepare and to teach the man to live the Law of the Gospel and of Sacrifice. Yea, it is by this 
________________
order that men take up that more precious part which has been given to all women. Yea, by this order of priesthood does he learn to sacrifice for others and to serve others, placing their needs above his own. Yea, by this priesthood, when he has received the commission of the Creator and Peacemaker, he may move the mountain of his own soul and make a straight path for his spirit. 
6 And the ordinances of the Order of Levi are the teaching and preaching of the peaceable things of the kingdom, baptism, the administration of the emblems of the Lord’s Sacrifice, the purification of the Ammonites, prayer, fasting, and so forth. 
7 And all men who have good intention and who have received through revelation and through the Holy Ghost the commission of God are entitled to seek this right of priesthood. Yea, and they enter into it with a covenant. And this is the nature of the covenant: 
8 Every man who takes up this covenant, having been commissioned and called of God, even as Aaron was called of God, shall come unto one who has also received the Lord’s commission and relate the revelation unto that person. And that person shall take them and lay hands upon them and, saying the person’s name plainly, they shall pronounce a blessing and confer this order of priesthood saying: 
9 By the commission I have received of the Lord, I confer upon you the Priesthood after the Order of Levi. You shall hereafter be known as a priest and teacher of this order and I do this in the name of the Peacemaker. 
10 Now I would that all should take note of how this ordinance is performed. For, the commission of the Lord is always clearly uttered when the order of the priesthood is conferred. And the purpose of the calling is also clearly stated. And when the Spirit has made an end of all that shall be said in the blessing, it is finished in the name of the Lord. 
11 This is the pattern and, though our language may all be different, and even all that must be said in the prayer and the blessing may all be different, yet shall a simple pattern always be followed. This is done so that all creation might know by whose word and by whose commission you speak and by whose word and will you do expect the creation to respond. 
12 Now, when women are called unto this work, the order of this priesthood is not conferred upon them, for they work in the covenant under that which the Mother has already conferred. Wherefore, how may we confer ought else? And behold, does the Lord work against His own mother? Or does He place Himself above Her in anything? I say unto you, He does not. For, He is the same who commanded all people to honor their father and their mother, that their days may long upon the land the Lord their God has given them. Wherefore, how then shall we? Behold, let us emulate the Lord. 
13 But when a woman shall request this priesthood, she shall also go unto one who has already received it and she shall relate how that she has received the commission of the Lord by revelation. Then she shall be taken and she shall be introduced into this order by an ordinance also, except that the Order of Levi shall not be conferred upon her, but she is ordained to that Order. Rather, she is ordained with an ordinance. And that person shall take her and lay hands upon her and, saying her name plainly, shall pronounce a blessing and ordain her unto this priesthood saying: 
14 By the commission I have received of the Lord, I ordain you according to the Order of Levi. You shall hereafter be known as a priest and teacher of this order and I do this in the name of the Peacemaker. 
15 And they who become priests and teachers after this order of priesthood assist the high priest in all things. Yea, they do keep the synagogue and they do teach the people. And they do keep peace in the community, for they work under the commission of the Peacemaker. And it is their work to prepare the hearts of all men and women to make a sacred sacrifice for the sake of all living and for the Lord. 
16 And behold, that order of priesthood which is the finisher and culmination of faith is called the Order of the Son of God. And it is by and through this priesthood that Moses did stand in the presence of the Peacemaker Himself and receive instruction of Him. Yea, it is by this priesthood that the man or the woman, having received the commission of the Lord, may walk upon the Way and be prepared in the spirit. 
17 And behold, the ordinances and c this priesthood have for their purpose to bring the heart and the intention of the man to that point where he may find a perfect stillness, that he might walk upon the Way and be instructed more fully in all good things. Yea, because of the culmination whereby the Lord does finish the man, through this order of the priesthood, the man is able to stand at the very veil of the Celestial World and cast it down. Or, in other words, he is able to discern the veil in himself and rend it from the top thereof even to the bottom thereof, and from the bottom thereof even to the top thereof. Indeed, by the ordinances and the covenants of this priesthood, the man may rend the veil that separates him from the Mother and from the Father. 
18 This order of priesthood has for its purpose to prepare and to teach the man to live the law of the chastity and of consecration. Yea, it is by this order that men are able to become partakers of that endowment of power that only Mothers and Fathers in Heaven may possess. Yea, by this order of priesthood does he learn the nature of creation and the duality of all things – that he is not without the woman and the woman is not with him, in the Lord. Yea, by this priesthood, when he has received the commission of the Creator and Peacemaker, he may learn to act and not be acted upon. 
19 And the ordinances of the Order of the Son of God are the teaching and preaching of the peaceable things of the kingdom, and the ordinances of the High Place. 
20 And all men who have good intention and who have received through revelation and through the Holy Ghost the commission of God are also entitled to seek this right of priesthood. Yea, and they enter into it with a covenant. And this is the nature of the covenant: 
21 Every man who takes up this covenant, having been commissioned and called of God, even as Aaron was called of God, shall come unto one who has also received the Lord’s commission and relate the revelation unto that person, and shall pledge his willingness to serve God all the days of his life. And that person shall take them and lay hands upon them and, saying the person’s name plainly, they shall pronounce a blessing and confer this order of priesthood saying: 
22 By the commission I have received of the Lord, I confer upon you the Priesthood after the Order of the Son of God. You shall hereafter be known as a high priest and Peli of this order and I do this in the name of the Peacemaker. 
23 Now I would that all should also take note of how this ordinance is performed. For, the commission of the Lord is always clearly uttered when the order of the priesthood is conferred. And the purpose of the calling is also clearly stated. And when the Spirit has made an end of all that shall be said in the blessing, it is finished in the name of the Lord. 
24 This is the pattern and, though our language may all be different, and even all that must be said in the prayer and the blessing may all be different, yet shall a simple pattern always be followed. And again, all creation shall know by whose word and by whose commission you speak and by whose word and will you do expect the creation to respond. 
25 Now, when women are called unto this work, the order of this priesthood is not conferred upon them, for they work in the covenant under that which the Mother has already conferred. 
26 But when any woman shall request this priesthood, she shall also go unto one who has already received it and she shall relate how that she has received the commission of the Lord by revelation and that she is determined to serve Him in all things. Then she shall be taken and she shall be introduced into this order by an ordinance also, except that the Order of the Son of God shall not be conferred upon her. Rather, she is ordained unto it with an ordinance. And that person shall take her and lay hands upon her and, saying her name plainly, they shall pronounce a blessing and ordain her unto this priesthood saying: 
27 By the commission I have received of the Lord, I ordain you according to the Order of the Son of God. You shall hereafter be known as a high priest and Peli of this order and I do this in the name of the Peacemaker. 
28 And they who become high priests and Peli after this order of priesthood assist the Lord and the Councils in all things, just as they who become priests and teachers assist the high priests and Peli. Yea, they do keep the High Place and the archives, and they do teach the people. And they also do keep peace in the community, for they too work under the commission of the Peacemaker. And it is their work to prepare the hearts of all men and women to stand in the very presence of the Mother and of the Father and receive of them the fullness. 
29 And they shall not seek this honor, or in other words, they shall not take up to speak and act in the name of the Lord God, unless they have received of Him the commission to do so. Wherefore, if anyone has a desire to serve Him, they are called to the work by Him. And the right of priesthood is that commission which He gives to them who make this covenant. By revelation He does commission them. By revelation He does direct them. Yea, by revelation He does govern His Church. 
30 And behold, let none believe that they possess anything of the Lord merely because they have had hands laid on them and because they have had this order conveyed upon them, or that order conferred. For there is no ordination that has any merit if not by the commission of He who is the author of them. And, if the Peacemaker gives not the commission, let no man or woman think that they have any right to priesthood. 
31 Behold, the Nem do not hold themselves to be more worthy of this honor than any other people. The honor is that the Lord does teach us the manner by which the Universe does function. And the power of the priesthood is a part of it. For all they who do learn to act in this power do exercise great faith upon the matter of creation. And, having the commission of the Creator, the matter does recognize in the voice of His servants that voice which did command them in the beginning. 
32 And being satisfied with that covenant by which they were first brought together, they do combine again to do the work of Him who created the worlds. It is by this power that the Brother of Jared caused mountains to move out of the way, that the people of God might pass by them. 
33 For the voice of the Creator is powerful because it is the voice of faith and of love and the elements do respond to His voice. Wherefore, that servant of the Lord who, having His commission, does speak and act in His name, invokes that first day of creation and once again the matter responds to the voice of the Master. And it is the same today as it was in that very first day, for all things are as one day to the Lord and also to that which He did create. Wherefore, how shall today be any different than in that day when He did command that the elements form themselves and that they should begin to fulfill the covenant that He made with the Father and with the Holy Ghost? And how can we say that the world does differ ought from that moment when the Mother did put the breath of life into all living things? 
34 And this is the thing that the servant of the Lord must understand. For, when His servants do speak and act in His name, the elements obey. Wherefore, it is written, take not the Lord’s name in vain. For the Lord God will not hold you harmless if you take His name in vain. 
35 And if a man, speaking in the name of God, but having not His commission, does bestow upon another the priesthood, what then? Shall there be any priesthood? I say unto you, Nay. 
36 And if a man, acting in the name of Christ, but having not His commission, does prophesy, what then? Shall it become scripture? Again, I say unto you, Nay. 
37 And shall the covenants of God be entered into without His commission? Shall anyone go up to the High Place and there perform the ordinances without that He has made known unto them His will? And, because a man say in his arrogance; This day I have an endowment from the Lord. Shall there be any power in the endowment? Nay! 
38 And shall any man declare to the elements his own election? Shall he testify to the wind, then, that he has made his calling and election sure? Shall a priesthood that he has made of clay convey such power to the sons of men? Do not believe it. 
39 Behold, God will not justify as many as do the same. For behold, He does give His commission to all them that seek it. Yea, every man and every woman who seeks His holy face, shall indeed see it and He shall give unto them an endowment of power such as only heavenly beings possess. 
40 And He shall declare your election. Yea, He shall give unto you the Holy Ghost and all things shall come back to your remembrance. Then shall He testify to the wind that He has made your calling and election sure. Surely, the power of the Creator, yea, even that priesthood given unto him of the Father and the Mother of our spirits, shall convey priesthood to them that seek Him. Behold, this you may believe. 
41 And He shall meet you when you go up to the High Place, if you wait upon His word. Surely, He shall reveal unto you His will and He will instruct you in all things. 
42 And men and women shall speak words of peace as they are moved upon by the Holy Ghost. And their children shall remember the words which they speak to gather them and make them their own. And is this not scripture? 
43 And men and women shall serve their neighbor in all the ordinances of the synagogue and also the High Place and the work they do shall be the Lord’s work, for He shall have instructed them. And when He has given His commission, they shall receive the priesthood after the orders that pertain thereto and according to the purpose of the Lord which pertains thereunto. And with His commission, they shall speak and act in His holy name and He shall justify and remember them and all their works on His behalf. For they shall be His servants and shall He not justify His own? 
44 For you may believe it, the Lord does delight in calling His servants and He does give them power, both pertaining to things of this life and this world, as well as lives and worlds without end. And He rejoices with all they that do take up His work and obey His will. And, seeking His commission, even after that they have received His priesthood and have been ordained unto an holy calling, they shall act and the creation shall react according to that commandment it received of Him so long ago. Yea, they shall act and yet be not acted upon, worlds without end. 
45 And herein is the thing in which Pharaoh did err. Behold, he claimed the right of his fathers to obtain knowledge of all things and sit upon the right hand of God. And he was not an evil man, nay, nor did he exercise evil upon his people. But he did consider that because he was a son of Noah that he could lay claim to that priesthood given to his fathers. But he sought not the commission of the Lord before laying claim to the work of his fathers. 
46 And, because he would not uphold the Law of Chastity, but did justify his grandfather in the thing wherewith he did dishonor unto Noah, it cannot be that he understood the meaning and the significance of the laws and commandments of God. 
47 And having no understanding of such things, he cannot have had the commission of the Lord in the thing that he sought. Wherefore, because of a heritage and a tradition of unrighteousness, he preserved a curse in the land. Yea, he preserved a sore curse. For by the tradition which he did justify, none could come to a knowledge of the ordinances of the High Place, and none could receive the Lord’s commission. Wherefore, he was of a lineage that had not right of priesthood, because he knew not that the right passes not from father unto son because of flesh and blood, but because the work and will of the Lord is in the teaching of the father unto his son. 
48 Yea, Pharaoh believed that, because Noah received his priesthood from his fathers, he ought to possess the same right because of the blood that flowed in him. For Pharaoh was of that same lineage whereby Noah the prophet did trace his generation to Adam our father. 
49 But behold, it is not flesh and it is not blood that conveys this right unto men, but the commission of Him who created us. Wherefore, it is not the blood of Hagoth, nor of Oug, nor of Nephi or Lehi, or Joseph or Jacob, nay, nor even of Abraham or of Adam, that gives right of priesthood. We do not deceive ourselves in this. For, we know that God does delight in speaking unto them that will call upon His name and seek His face. Wherefore, He employs no steward there, but prefers that we come unto him and not unto our forefathers. 
50 Yea, He does entreat us to come unto Him. That He gives unto us the duties and ordinances of the priesthood is certain. But such things are not the priesthood, nay, it does not define it. For in all, such things do only draw our minds to ponder His works, and our hearts to seek communion with Him. Yea, the works and ordinances of the priesthood do place our feet upon a good road, a straight path, and surely we shall see His face and we shall be like Him. But it shall be by walking that road that we do achieve such things. Behold, the ordinances do not save us. It is by living the principles that such things teach us that conveys us into the presence of the Lord. 
CHAPTER 15 
1 Behold, the Nem know unto whom they look for atonement. It is the same today as it was when the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost did gather all living into that great council wherein they did initiate the New and Everlasting Covenant. Yea, we do know that we shall have all things brought to our remembrance by the Holy Ghost, even the Holy Spirit of Promise. And behold, I say again, we do know unto whom we look for exaltation. We do look to our Creator, the Peacemaker, even the Son of God. 
2 And we do also know that should any man, kindred or nation declare unto the world that salvation comes not through Him who is mighty to save, behold, it is a sign unto us that they have left the plan of happiness and the path of truth. Yea, if ever we begin to think of ourselves as saviors in that light, we know to turn ourselves again and repent of the evil which has come into our hearts. 
3 Now, this thing did verily come to pass in Mentina. For there was elevated to the seat of high priest one who was mighty to prophesy. Not long after the controversy was resolved in Mentina over who should stay and who should remove to another place, in order that the people placed not too great a burden upon the land, the high priest whom the people of Mentina had chosen died as all men do. 
4 And they resolved upon another to take unto themselves a certain man to be high priest who was mighty in prophecy. And his name was Tucantor, and he was descended from Hagoth and from Hemen. 
5 And he did walk upon the Way for a time. But behold, he ceased to subject all things unto the confirmation of the Holy Ghost, insomuch that he did begin to interpret every thought that did come into his mind and into his heart as the very word and will of God. And because of this, he did begin to place constraints upon the personal revelation that is the right of every person. 
6 Yea, when he called upon his fellow servants to fill certain stewardships, he did declare unto them that they had no choice in the matter. Or, in other words, he taught them that they ought not to importune the Lord in the matter because that he had already received the word of the Lord. And also he did begin to teach that only the high priest had the keys to prophesy and to receive revelation for and in behalf of the whole nation. Wherefore, the individual had no more right to such things, for the Lord had chosen him to be His Seer. 
7 Now, in this thing he did greatly err. For, the seer is the servant of the Lord. And if he is the Lord’s servant then he must also be the servant of the people. Yet the high priest of Mentina did manifest what he declared to be the will of the Lord unto all the people and he did not invite them to follow, but rather, he demanded obedience of them. Wherefore, he became the taskmaster of all the people. 
8 And this was grievous to the people. For the Lord had taught them that they must come unto Him. But the high priest insisted that they must not importune Him nor weary Him with inquiry. Yea, he even taught the people that to do so, or in other words, to inquire of the Lord concerning any matter upon which the high priest had already spoken, was to take the Lord’s name in vain. 
9 And behold, this teaching did go about the country and there were some of the high priests in other cities and settlements that took it up also. Yea, and even some of the priests and the teachers did also take it up. To the extent that a division developed among the people. 
10 And the people of my city did come unto me and they did inquire of me my opinion of the doctrine, saying; 
11 What think you of this new doctrine which the high priest of Mentina does preach concerning importuning the Lord in all things? For, he does teach us that we ought not to seek the confirmation of the Holy Ghost in all things, but that in all matters upon which our leaders have already spoken, we should leave well enough alone. For, if we importune the Lord, yea, if we weary Him, do we not endanger our own salvation? 
12 And I answered them saying; 
13 This doctrine is false. Let us go up even unto Mentina and inquire of the high priest concerning it. For it is my understanding that the Lord has I do not recall where He has admonished us to pray unto the high priest. Wherefore, let us go up even unto Mentina and see what this high priest will say. 
14 And we did make a delegation and we did travel up even unto Mentina. And we did arrive in the middle of the day and the high priest and all them that he had called to assist him had gone up into the temple to worship. And behold, when we came nigh unto the temple, behold, one of his servants did come forth and declare unto us that the high priest was at private service in the temple and we could not go in unto him. 
15 Now, this was a curious thing indeed. For, have our forefathers not taught that the temple is the High Place of the Lord and that none should ever be prevented from going in unto it? I say unto you, This is the custom of the High Place of the Lord. 
16 Wherefore, I did beat upon the door of the temple or lodge of Adam to find the high priest there. And I found him not. Whereupon, we did pass through. And we did beat upon the doors of all the lodges of the temple until we had ascended the hill even unto the temple of Eve and the door thereof. 
17 And when I did beat upon the door, a servant did come out unto us and addressed us, saying; 
18 What is the cause of this noise that you make in the holy place? Have you no reverence for the temple of God or of His priesthood? 
19 And I did answer him. And these are the words with which I did make my response; 
20 How is it that the doors to the temple of Eve stand closed to her children? Has this ever been? Or when have the doors of the High Place become a bulwark to prevent entrance to the righteous? 
21 And the man did answer me, saying; 
22 Behold, Moroni, if you were truly the righteous as you say, you would not come up to the High Place bellowing like a bull. Those within are worshiping in reverence. Be still and disturb them not! 
23 And these words did sting me to the center, and I did answer him, saying; 
24 I come to make a joyful sound with my brother the high priest. Or is the worship of the high priest become so reverent that there is no joy to be found in the High Place under his stewardship? How is it that the high priest does go into the High Place and lock the doors behind him? When did the ordinances and the observance of them become private worship? 
25 And the man, whose name was Shan Rayin, did answer me, saying; 
26 Behold, the high priest did receive of the Lord a revelation and did give him new ordinances to be performed herein. And only those called of God by the mouth of the high priest of Mentina, who is the seer and prophet of God, may go up into the High Place. For the Lord has always given the management of the High Place and of the Archives into the hands of the high priest. Wherefore, his are the keys of this priesthood and none possess them but him in this generation. Wherefore, do not come up from out of your waste place, your refuge, and seek to order the house of God. 
27 Now behold, these words did kindle in me a wrath which I had not felt since the Nephite war, and I did pass by Sha Rayin and I did stand forth and cast down the door of the temple of Eve. And when I had cast down the door, I did set it gently against the wall thereof, that none might think that I lacked reverence for the house of my mother. But behold, I did pass into the lodge to confront the high priest. 
28 But, before I could stand forth to make my inquiry of him, behold we were set upon by armed men and we were forced to retreat from out of the High Place altogether, for we were not accustomed to carrying arms in the holy place. And these armed men did stand forth to prevent any conversation with the high priest. 
29 Wherefore, I did take the delegation and we did assemble in the place of Counsel. Yea, and we did call upon and summon the Council to hear our grievance. But behold, the clerk of the Council did inform us that by a revelation received of the high priest, the Council of Mentina had been dissolved and done away. Wherefore, there was none to hear our complaint. 
30 Now, all this had been done in the city of Mentina by word of revelation received by the high priest. And it was done quickly and under arms was it accomplished. Yea, and so quickly was this done that none yet knew of it even within most precincts of the city. So quickly had this man done this wickedness that the people themselves were hardly aware of it. And he had done it under guise of priesthood. 
31 And we did voice the news abroad in the city, that all might know of it. And a multitude did gather to hear the rumor, scarcely believing that such a thing could come to pass in Mentina. And when we had related to the multitude what had taken place amongst their fair city, they believed us not at all. Wherefore, we did entreat them to go even up to the High Place and see for themselves if there were not armed men at the gate thereof to bar the way before them. 
32 And they did return unto us and they did testify unto the multitude that our words were spoken in truth. Yea, they did testify unto all the people that the high priest had set armed men at the gate of the High Place to bar the way to any who had not received of him a new priesthood. 
33 Then were the people outraged and they all went straightway up to the temple to see the thing for themselves. And behold, when the guards saw the number of the people approaching them, that it was great, they cast down their weapons and begged the crowd to hear them, saying; 
34 Behold, men and women of Mentina, put this thing not upon us. For did you not raise up to yourselves this high priest? And is he not a man great in prophecy and in visions? Wherefore, he did command us in accordance with his stewardship over this house. And are we able to judge our master? 
35 And with these words they did placate the mob. For behold, never before was such a thing seen in Mentina. Yea, never before had the doors of the High Place been shut to any person. And never before had a high priest ever sought to usurp the rights of the people and subvert the ways of the Lord. And their anger was hot. 
36 And they did place me at the head of the mob and we did pass through even up the hill to the door of the temple of Eve, and we did enter therein and found the high priest kneeling before an altar of stone cut by the hand of man, yea, with steps leading up to it, which he had caused to be raised up in that holy place. 
37 And when he did perceive that his guards had not kept the people from his private worship, he stood before us and was wroth. And surely he did speak to us with hard words, saying; 
38 What is this evil? How do you come up to this holy place, yea, even into the sanctuary of the High Place to disturb my worship? 
39 And I did answer him, saying; 
40 Behold, I am Moroni, the same who was high priest in this place, but am now high priest of Elak Kowa. I came up into this place with that same spirit and countenance with which I have ever approached the High Place. But behold, I was met with locked doors and armed men. What have you been doing here? 
41 And he answered me, saying; 
42 Go back to Elak Kowa, Moroni. Go back even unto your own city and rule it as you see fit. The Lord has chosen me to be prophet of Mentina and has given me priesthood and authority. Wherefore, seek not to circumvent the Lord or His prophet. 
43 And I answered him, saying; 
44 I will of a surety go back to my own home, Tucantor, but not before you have answered my questions. For I esteem that the high priest of Mentina is a duty and a stewardship of some import to us all. Wherefore, when strange news came even unto me in my own city, I determined that I ought to withhold judgment until I had spoken unto you concerning the thing. 
45 For behold, Tucantor, I believed not that such stories as were told to me could be true. For, I was told of the undoing of all that the Nem have stood for over the course of all the generations since we left the Land Southward. But I could not believe that such a thing could have been done by one chosen by the people to safeguard even that which is most precious to us. 
46 Wherefore, I shall leave and return unto my own place in good and due course. But before I do, you shall surely answer me my inquiry. 
47 And Tucantor puffed himself up in his pride and he answered me, saying; 
48 Of a truth, Moroni, you shall ask your questions. But I say unto you, I shall answer only that which pleases me. For I have received the keys of the kingdom and do not answer to you. Wherefore, make your inquiry. 
49 And I did reason with him; 
50 I have been told that you have decreed that the Lord makes known His mystery and His will to you through revelation. 
51 That is correct, Moroni. The Lord has revealed to me His order. Yea, I have received under the hand of His servant, even an angel of the Lord, that order of priesthood whereby He shall govern His people in righteousness. 
52 And I answered unto him; That is well Tucantor. Surely the Lord shall give His commission unto whom He will, for it is His alone to give. 
53 You speak the truth, Moroni. The Lord does give of His authority sparingly. And by the word of His angel He has given the keys of His authority unto me. 
54 And again I answered him saying; 
55 How may one know of a surety that what you say is true? How may I know beyond the doubting in my heart that you are truly the anointed of God and that I may follow all your words with confidence? Is there not some way in which the Lord might appease my anxiety? 
56 And Tucantor did answer me, saying; 
57 Do not trifle with the things of the Lord, Moroni. Nay, make not a plaything of the word and will of Him whose voice is like a two-edged sword. For to play upon His words is to take up the sword not by the hilt, but by the blade. Wherefore, have a care. 
58 Surely, what you say is true, Tucantor. But I am just a man. How may a mere man know the truth of what you say? How may I test your prophecy? 
59 And Tucantor answered me, saying; 
60 You cannot. You must obey. The Lord will reveal what He will and you shall have no complaint. And the Lord shall reveal His secrets unto whom He will and again you shall have no complaint. 
61 And I answered him; You are mistaken, Tucantor. For the Lord has taught us and we have all that He has revealed unto His prophets. And has He not entreated us to subject all things unto the confirmation of the Holy Ghost? Has He not taught that the Holy Ghost shall be a comforter unto us? And shall the Holy Ghost no longer bring anything to our remembrance because you have seen an angel? 
62 And you declare that there shall be but one prophet. Is this a sound doctrine? Is this how the Lord has treated with His people? Shall we throw out all the scriptures because you have seen an angel? Shall we give over our responsibility to test all things, yea, and prove all things by the Holy Ghost because you are a man with gifts? 
63 And hearing this, the high priest was wroth and he spoke harshly unto me and unto all the multitude. And the rumor of his words went out unto all the people. 
64 Moroni, you are mistaken. We live in different times. Do not judge the Lord your God. Surely, if He desires to work differently today than He did in generations past, what is this to you. Will you dictate to the Lord how He shall do this, or will you regulate the Lord in how He shall do that? 
65 And I answered him, saying; 
66 I do not begrudge the Lord anything. Nay, I would not seek to judge my God. Let Him do according to His word and will. For, His ways are always good and just. And if He has given you a new revelation which does illuminate His word and His will for us in our day, I am well. I shall follow your revelation. Yea, I shall bow to your prophecy, if the Holy Ghost does testify and witness unto me the truth of it. 
67 For, behold I say unto you Tucantor, there is more than one God in the Heavens with whom we have to do. Yea, there is the Father and the Mother. And there is the Son. And there is the Holy Ghost. And there are many Heavenly Beings. And I know that they are separate beings, yet their purpose is one. And they did enter into a covenant with each other to bring about this world and this creation. 
68 Wherefore, the Lord has taught that He shall surely reveal His secrets unto His servants the prophets. But behold, He has also taught that we must submit all His words and revelations unto the confirmation of the Holy Ghost. 
69 Verily, he has taught that it is by the power of the Holy Ghost that we shall test all things. Yea, it is by the gift of the Holy Ghost that we shall prove all things. And it is by the unspeakable gift of the Holy Ghost that all things shall be made know, yea, all things shall become written in us as upon a book. 
70 But behold, you have declared that to test your words by this great gift shall be accounted unto us as sin and for unrighteousness. Yea, you have condemned us for importuning the Lord, saying that we must not seek a confirmation of anything that has already been spoken by the prophet of God. 
71 But I ask you, what shall we do with all that has been spoken by his prophets before you? If you are truly the prophet of God in our day, and if you possess the keys of the priesthood and of the kingdom, then do you also suggest that the archives be broken and the records be burned and melted down? Yea, shall we throw out the revelations of God to His prophets because you have seen an angel? Is this truly the will of the Lord? 
72 And what shall they do who walk upon the Way and speak with angels daily? Have the angels locked the doors that give upon the Way as you have locked the doors of the temple? Or does God no longer wish His children to come unto Him. Does He have no time for us now? Does He no longer welcome us into His presence? And if this is so, then what is the purpose of this existence? Shall you do away with the very creation because you have seen an angel? 
73 You declare that the Lord has conferred upon you a new order of priesthood and you deny the High Place and the ordinances thereof to all but they whom you authorize with this order. But tell me, Tucantor, have you received His commission? 
74 And Tucantor answered me, saying; 
75 Behold, as I sat in the temple, an angel appeared to me and taught me concerning the ways of the Lord. And he did teach me that we have all been misled. Yea, we have been all these generations bound up in error. For, we have believed a doctrine that has gone contrary to the gospel as it was given unto our fathers. Yea, we have left the path of truth to go down a road that leads into oblivion. 
76 Set aside all that you have learned of men and listen to me, for I speak the words of God. There is one authority given of heaven whereby the ordinances of salvation may be delivered unto the children of men. And this authority is the priesthood. By it and through it men speak and act in the name of God and only in this way may we avail ourselves of the ordinances and performances required by the Lord for salvation’s sake. Surely, He will not admit anyone into His kingdom who has not received the ordinances of the priesthood. 
77 And He has revealed through this same angel that, although many men might possess this authority, they shall nevertheless be governed by that one in whom the Lord shall invest the keys thereof. And none shall have more authority than the anointed of God. Wherefore, it is reasonable that when the prophet of God shall receive a doctrine by revelation, he is not to be questioned in it, neither by men, nor by spirit. 
78 For, the gifts of the Spirit are good and they are useful, but they do not supersede the priesthood. And shall one man have a gift and do away with the authority given to the anointed of God? I say unto you, Nay, for this is confusion. Yet have we been confused all these generations. For, we have been taught that even Christ Himself may not speak without our rushing out to test His words by this Holy Ghost. And shall the Holy Ghost, which is but a spirit, possess more authority than God, who is both body and spirit? 
79 And shall one man’s gift overcome another’s. It has been revealed unto me that one man may have a gift and it may only be useful until it seeks to make conquest of the power and authority of the priesthood. And this priesthood God gives in orders and He sets apart His chosen to govern it on earth, even as He governs it in heaven. And behold, at the head of the orders of the priesthood, God places His anointed. For, God’s house is a house of order and there is no confusion in it. 
80 Now, it is certain that they who act against the word and will of God, as it is revealed by Him to His servants the prophets, shall not enjoy the same blessings as they who obey His commandments. And surely, they shall not go up into the House of the Lord if they will not obey His commandments. Wherefore, it has been revealed unto me by the angel that only they who have proven themselves loyal to the commandments of God ought to enter into the holy halls of His home. It is to keep out the filthiness of the world that the doors of the High Place are closed to all but the righteous. 
81 Wherefore, you were mistaken Moroni when you said that the doors of the temple were unjustly barred before you. For, they are only locked to those who lack authority to go up thither. And did you come unto the high priest of this city to seek this priesthood? I say unto you Nay. The word and the will of God is not important to you. But you did come straight up unto the High Place as if it was your own house to do with as you will. 
82 And behold, you lied when you said that armed men assailed you. For, it is you who assailed the House of God. Those servants of the Lord whom He placed to guard the High Place intended no injury upon you, but can you claim the same? I say unto you, Nay. You came to do harm and injury upon the Lord in His own house. Do not judge the servants of the Lord for their loyalty and for their desire to preserve that which is precious. 
83 And after this manner did the high priest of Mentina speak in the temple of Eve where we found him. And the people were all struck dumb, not by any power of heaven or of earth, but by amazement. For, never had they heard such doctrine. But they had allowed this to take place in their own city and right under their own eaves. Wherefore, they were amazed at the words of their high priest. 
84 And there was one man whose name was Micah, and he cried out to the people, saying; 
85 Let us call upon the Council of the City to hear this matter. For surely these are strange doctrines and not like anything that we have heard or been taught. 
86 And I answered him, saying; 
87 A good thought. Yea, that would be right, according to the laws and traditions of the people of this city. But behold, the high priest has released the Council and has not called for a new one. Who then shall hear the case? 
88 And the people cried out in one voice, yea, the common voice of the people was heard on the Mountain of the Lord’s House and it echoed down the streets and alleyways of Mentina. And they cried out in one accord that they did not sustain the high priest. 
89 And they took him and stripped him of the shawl and removed from him the seat of high priest. And he walked through the midst of them in his pride even unto his own house. And when he had reached his own house he did turn again and address the people, saying; 
90 Behold, I am still high priest in this city. For, I did receive the anointing of God. I did not become high priest upon your appointment, but under the hands of an angel. Wherefore, how can you think to remove from me what has been given by God? And behold, they who remain loyal to me shall labor under my direction day by day until I sit once again to judge this city and its people. Wherefore, think not that by the common consent of this people that I have lost ought because of you. 
91 And none of the ordinances performed for any reason by any person in this city, nay, behold by anyone in the whole land, shall be acceptable to the Lord until the people do uphold the right by which they seek to act in His holy name. And when they do that, He will once again accept their sacrifice. Until then, you shall all labor under the condemnation of God, a condemnation which shall not be lifted by the common consent of the wicked. 
92 And he went within his house and was high priest no more. 


CHAPTER 16 
1 Now, this event did disturb the people greatly. For they had always thought that the high priest did act in accordance with that which is confirmed by the Holy Ghost. And it did seem that this high priest did speak contrary to that confirmation. Yea, even he did speak in contradiction of those things which the Lord Himself did teach when He visited our forefathers. 
2 But there was some truth in his words. For, the Lord did give the orders of the priesthood to be a means whereby men might learn to do the things that He does. And also, He did give the priesthood that men and women might learn to serve one another. 
3 But He did by no means teach that the priesthood is the font of salvation. For the Holy Ghost is that holy being by whose power we may know the truth and have a remembrance of all things. And also that same Holy Ghost does seal up the righteous unto Christ. Wherefore, He is called the Holy Spirit of Promise and it is by this sealing that we may come unto Christ and become His. For, the Peacemaker is the font of our salvation. 
4 And behold, we know that this is the work and the purpose of priesthood. Yea, it is to bring men and women unto the Peacemaker and to be sealed up His. Wherefore, heaven and earth may pass away, yet shall all that is His stand forever. And therefore, if we are His, then when the earth does flee and the heavens melt away, yet shall we stand in our lot and live. 
5 But Tucantor would have it believed that this same Holy Ghost is secondary to the priesthood and that His purpose is not as has been taught by prophets and by God Himself. Yea, he would have us all believe that the power of the priesthood supersedes that unspeakable gift of the Holy Ghost and that we ought not have the right to seek a confirmation of the truth of all things. 
6 But this is contrary to the work and the will of God. For, are we not taught that we must seek His face? And how shall we know of a surety that God even exists? Shall Tucantor declare and all simply believe? Is this sufficient? I say unto you, Nay. 
7 Behold, I do believe that the land of Jerusalem, from whence came our forefathers, does truly exist far away to the West. But I have never stepped upon that land. Nay, I cannot testify of my own knowledge that Jerusalem is real and that in that city there yet stands one stone upon another. Indeed, how may I do it? For, unless I see the city with my own eyes, I cannot testify anything about it. 
8 But behold, I can and do testify of the existence and the divinity of my Lord, yea, even every day of my life. And how may this be done unless I have seen Him with my own eyes? Behold, by the power of the Holy Ghost has the truth of the identity and the character of God been made known to me. 
9 Does the high priest make a thing so simply by declaring it? Or does God exist because the high priest declares it? I say unto you, Nay. Behold, the high priest may only testify of what he knows by and through the gift of the Holy Ghost which is in him and then invite others to seek that same confirmation. 
10 But, if I receive not the same confirmation as the high priest, shall I be condemned as a sinner? Believe it not. Or shall I be cast out from among the people because I receive not the same confirmation as the high priest? I say unto you, Nay. Or is it the high priest unto whom I must come to obtain a remission of my sins? Or is it unto the high priest that I must seek to be sealed? 
11 Behold, the people of Mentina took from Tucantor the mantle of high priest of the city, but can they remove from him to be known as Peli and high priest? Not at all. It is verily so, he does not agree with the voice or common consent of the people, but that does not make him a sinner or miscreant. The intent of his heart shall continue to define him. 
12 Behold, the priesthood of God is a tool for him and through it we may work to perfect ourselves and better our lives through service to our fellow beings. I am not given to be high priest in the city of Elak Kowa because I am perfect already. Nay! But rather, I am called up by my people to serve them in all things, and in this way I am edified. Yea, in this thing I am given a means whereby I might to do more for my neighbor than I might have otherwise been able to do. 
13 And behold, I am high priest to my city. Does this give me authority to do more than my calling allows? Yea, does this give me authority to order the lives of my neighbors? To say unto them, you must do this or you must do that. And behold, if you do not this or that, you shall not be blessed of the Lord? Does the high priest, or any office of the priesthood, give anyone the right or authority to declare worthiness, or to withhold ordinances? Is the priesthood mighty to save, or is it the priesthood that which brings salvation? I say unto, it is not. And does the priesthood convey dominion over anything? I say unto you, It does not. 


CHAPTER 17 
1 And behold, the people met again in council to choose someone to sit in the seat of the high priest of Mentina, and they deliberated long on the matter. And when they had fasted and prayed, behold, they cast the lot upon Minoet, the daughter of Shedet. 
2 And Minoet called a Council of the Peli of the city of Mentina for the purpose of making a regulation of the church. And she counseled them to find out the will of the Lord by revelation, and also the will of the people, as to how the church ought to be managed. 
3 And she did also search the archives and made a record of all the ordinances and ceremonies then in use by the Nem to make plain who was to administer them and how they were to be administered. And she did request of the people that they inquire of the Lord in all things, that the people might once again be brought into unity. 
4 And these are the ordinances that are being administered to the Nem at this time. And I do include them in my record. 
5 Behold, the Ordinance of the Blessing of the Newborn Children, or Unchi-Im, is made by the parents of the child, or one from among the family or friends of the child who has been designated to act in the office of Peli for them. And this ordinance is not a saving grace, but is a tradition and a custom among the Nem. 
6 And the Ordinance of the Blessing of Children, or Unchi-Aht, is made as often as the parents deem necessary and it is done by the parents or the Peli. And this ordinance is not a saving grace, but is a good tradition and a custom of the Nem. 
7 And when a young person has received a remission of their sins, they are baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And this ordinance is made by the parent or the Peli. And this baptism is called Unchi Ahm Aht Ahm, and it is a saving grace. By it we do betoken that we have become in all ways the Lord’s and that He has washed us clean of all iniquity. Wherefore, let all people repent and be baptized. And the young person is straightly charged to receive the Holy Ghost. 
8 And when a person wishes to renew any good thing and continue clean in the eyes of the Lord, they participate in the Unipi and the Itsipi after the manner of the Ammonites (ordinances of the Sweat Lodge). And the Peli shall perform the ordinances as dictated by the Holy Ghost. And this is a saving grace, but it is not required for all people. 
9 And at any time that a new thing is confirmed, they do repeat the Unchi Ahm Aht Ahm. And this is done by the family and in the company of friends to demonstrate with an ordinance and a token every new emergence out of the natural state of man. 
10 And when a person has received the commission of the Lord by revelation, and reports the same unto their parent, they are made Peli. And this is done by the laying on of hands. If the person is a young man, this priesthood is conferred upon him and he receives a blessing and an ordination. If the person is a young woman, she receives a blessing and an ordination. And this priesthood is the Order of Levi and it is received by all who shall perform public ordinances, but behold, it is not a saving grace. Nevertheless, the Lord has given it and He desires that it be done in this manner. 
11 And when any person is called up to do a public service unto the people, behold the Peli does take that person and, laying hands upon them, gives a blessing and an ordination to the calling. And this is done in public or in private, and all the people sustain the calling. 
12 And the people meet often to participate in the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper, which they do call Manna. And it is an ordinance that is made by the Peli, as the scriptures do instruct and according to the guidance and the direction of the Holy Ghost. And behold, it is a saving grace, wherefore, the people do meet together often to receive of it. 
13 And the people also make this ordinance in their homes. And when the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper is made in the home, they seek the commission of the Lord in it each time. 
14 And when a new house or public building is constructed, the Peli does pronounce a blessing upon the place to make it holy ground. And this is done by the direction of the Holy Ghost, but it is not a saving grace. 
15 And when a field is broken, the same is done as for a new house. And also when a field is harvested, the same is done. 
16 And the priests and the Peli do offer up a sacred smoke of incense, and the people do this also as families. Yea, and even as individuals, we do offer up a sweet smoke and a sweet smell unto the Lord. And this we do with all our prayers and in all our oblations and ordinances. And this semblance of the ancient temple of our fathers we do preserve in honor of all those whose prayers have risen up unto heaven in our behalf. But it is not a saving grace and is not required for salvation’s sake. Notwithstanding, we make this offering out of the honor that we feel for the sacrifices of those who have gone before us and for the gifts that they passed on to us. 
17 Now, the ordinances of the High Place are administered to the people through the office of the high priest and all the ordinances are made by the Peli. And the high priest shall manage the affairs of the temple so that all might go there freely and receive of the ordinances. And these ordinances are a saving grace, wherefore, all the people do go up to the High Place and receive of them. 
18 And the high priest may call men and women to be priests and teachers. And when this is done, they are taken aside and hands are laid upon them, and they are ordained unto these callings. 
19 And behold, the Peli do choose a Council of thirteen from among them and they do confer upon them the Priesthood of Melchizedek , even after the pattern given by the Lord. And they do this upon receiving the commission of the Lord by revelation. And in this way, the council that He appointed is preserved. And behold, it is out of this council that the people do choose and call up their high priests. And behold, every city does this same thing. 
20 And when a man is called up to this council, he is taken aside by the whole council and this priesthood is conferred upon the man and he is ordained a high priest by the laying on of hands. And when a woman is called up to this council, she is also taken aside by the council and she is ordained a high priest by the laying on of hands. But behold, this order of priesthood is not conferred upon her, for she has it already of the Mother. Wherefore, how may we confer it? 
21 And behold, the people choose from among this council who shall be high priest of the city. And, upon the election, the council does take the one elected, be they man or woman, and they do lay hands upon the elected and ordain them high priest of the city. 
22 Now, these are the ordinances of the priesthood, and they are for the edification of the people. 


CHAPTER 18 
1 And under the direction of the high priest, the people made a regulation of the church and of their religion. But behold, they required no man or woman to comply with their directives as Tucantor did, but all were invited to seek a confirmation of the truth for themselves. 
2 And behold, if any person received not the same confirmation as the rest of the people, they were not punished or shunned. But because all the people were admonished to receive the Holy Ghost in all things, and also the direct commission of the Lord, the influence of those who would control the people or take authority over them was made the lesser of their concerns. 
3 But when a person broke the laws of the city, they were dealt with according as the people did dictate. And this was done to insure the peace, but never as a means of demanding that one person believe the same as any other. 
4 And behold, there were those who continued to believe the teachings of Tucantor and this did create a division among the people. But such division was not against the law of the people and, even though Tucantor would have taken the control of the entire city, his followers were still considered part of the community and their vote had as much weight as any others. 
5 And Tucantor took some few of his followers and they did request of the council a piece of land on the which to build a synagogue. And the council did grant the land and they did build. And the followers of Tucantor worshiped God after their own conscience and most ways their worship did resemble the ways of the Nem, except that the priesthood was elevated in an extreme manner and almost they did appear to worship the high priest and extol him instead of God. And the priesthood and all public service was withheld from all women. 
6 But behold, they were full of charity and good works, and they did speak peaceably to all the people. And they did teach baptism with water and also the purification of the Ammonites. And they did marry and were given in marriage. Yea, in all ways they did resemble the Nem and they did do the things the Nem did, except in the power and authority they rendered unto the priesthood, and also in the manner in which they did subjugate women. 
7 And the more part of their beliefs did appear well to the people and they did allow them all freedom to act and be acted upon in the city, just as they did any other citizen. But behold, among the followers of Tucantor, there were those who had much, in terms of spiritual things, and there were those who had less. And behold, among them there were even those unto whom the ordinances and the gifts were withheld because they were deemed unworthy by the high priest. Wherefore, there were divisions among them and hard feelings and harsh words, and this thing was seen by the council of Mentina and by the Peli as troubling, and they watched them silently.
8 But the city and its citizens did prosper, as did all the cities and settlements in the land, with the exception of certain cities away down in the south by the gulf of the sea. In some of these cities there was division and unrest. For some of the people there had ceased to give of their surplus and began to heap up their substance as in days of old.
9 And this thing was because of the remnant of the Gadiantons left in that region after the Great War. And they did pervert the ways of the Nem.
10 But in the northern regions and in the mountains, the ways of the Nem continued unchanged and the people did prosper and grow. And behold, they did also prosper in the things of the Spirit. For they did seek the face of Christ and the confirmation of the Holy Ghost. Wherefore, in their daily walk and their daily talk, they did seek the sacred and they were highly favored of the Lord.
11 And in my own city there was peace. Yea, in all the remainder of my life, I saw no reason to grieve or to hasten away to settle any conflict at all. The people of Elak Kowa needed little admonition to seek their God and this was a great comfort to me.
12 And behold, I became old, having lived well past the age of a tree. And I began to feel my Lord call me. Yea, I began to feel that He would call me home. Wherefore behold, I did beg the people to call another to sit in the seat of the high priest in my stead. But they would not, preferring that I ought to be high priest to them until the day that I should be taken from among them. 
13 And I do finish my record. For I do believe that I shall surely lay down my life soon. Yea, I shall go unto my grandfathers and enter into that rest of the Lord that He does promise unto them who love Him.
14 For I do love the Lord with all my heart. And with all my might I do worship Him. Yea, He is my wellspring, and the bread of my life. He has promised that I might be filled with His love and, behold, He has done it. Yea, He has promised that I might have His light and, behold, I do walk daily in that light.
15 Behold, I have been blessed beyond all that I had thought possible. Yea, I have been blessed greatly. I have bound myself to a daughter of God and we have seen His face together.
16 Our children do honor us and do us honor in all their walk and talk. Yea, in all that they have done, they have given us cause only to praise our God in them. Surely, our children are a blessing unto us.
17 And behold, we have prospered in every good thing that we have undertaken. Yea, our crops do grow and our beasts multiply. Our work has been hard and sometimes we have been greatly burdened. But, with every burden under which we have bowed our backs, giving thanks unto God, behold, He has blessed us and succored us.
18 And behold, has He hid His face from us? I say unto you, Nay! He has led us into His presence. And it is a great blessing to us that He does not require us to wait until the day of our death to come unto Him, and a great blessing that we may approach Him even in our bodies. For behold, He has prepared the Way before us and we do make good use of it.
19 And this is the key to our prosperity, our success, and our happiness. For is it possible that we could have been so prosperous and happy without His presence in our lives? It may be possible that we might have succeeded in the wilderness, but could we claim such happiness? Or can anyone say that greater happiness can be achieved than that the Lord should prepare all things before them? Nay, but we have been blessed and prospered because of the goodness of our God.
20 For the world is a wilderness and we are lost in it without the Lord. Yea, we do walk alone in darkness, hoping to find truth and health, and hoping to be able to provide for our needs. And the sun does rise upon us each day, but so also does it rise upon our enemies. Lone and dangerous is the world and filled with calamity.
21 Yea, the world is full of war and of rumor of evil and without the love of God we would be as the beasts of the field and of the mountains. For, surely He does love them also, but they are left to make their way in the wild. Behold, short and bitter is the life of the wild animal, and so too would be the life of man if it were not for the Lord and His grace.
22 For behold, because of Him we may become more than we are. Yea, because of His atonement, we may hope to emerge from darkness into the light of the day of His grace. Yea, and we have hope that our lives may account for a greater thing and a greater work. Behold, we may arise out of this darkness into a blessed state of happiness.
23 And behold, He has provided that this life might be a type of the life that we shall enjoy hereafter. Yea, even in the midst of darkness, yet may we walk upon the Way with Him and see His face. And behold, walking with Him and in His way, we may be instructed in all things and emerge, putting down this clay and taking up great glory and exaltation.
24 We shall not remain as we are but shall become even as He is. And if we are perfected in all things, then are we not made as the Father? Then are we not become as the Mother? And is this not a greater thing than we could ever imagine? Yea, is this not a blessing?
25 For it is beyond hope that we could have overcome our natures without the assistance of Him who overcame all things. Yea, it is beyond hope that we could have, in this carnal, put away all carnality. Behold, it is beyond hope that we could have arisen with our mortality into immortality. Great is God and holy, for He has provided for us a way out of darkness.
26 And behold, we shall rise into immortality and eternal life. Yea, because of His atonement, we shall cast aside all that is beastly. The night of our tribulation shall bring again the dawning of His glory in us. And we shall learn war no more. Surely, our swords shall we make into plowshares, and our spears into pruning hooks. And the science of war we shall teach no more unto our children. For the Lord is our vanguard and our rearguard. Yea, He shall go before us and we are girded up in His love.
27 Behold, the Lord is our foundation and our sure wall. He is the buttress that does protect us from the forces of the world. He has revealed Himself to us and does not hide His face from us. We do live in His presence and He does instruct us.
28 And we do come into His presence and He does make His abode with us. Surely, there can be no greater blessing from heaven than that we do walk and talk with the Lord our God. For, what calamity can compare and what tribulation can make conquest of that peace which comes only from the presence of God?
29 And His yoke is not heavy. We are not bowed down by His commandments. His doctrine is simple and it is easy to live. We are edified by His spirit and the Holy Ghost is our constant companion. There is no want in our souls and we do hunger and thirst, but not for bread and wine, for of these things we have plenty. But we do hunger and thirst after righteousness because the Lord is with us. 
30 Behold we do honor the Lord in all things, remembering Him and His sacrifice for us. He has taken us into His household and we are His children. Yea, we do sit at the feet of our Lord and we do learn wisdom, even as a little child does sit at the feet of his grandfather or his grandmother and learn wisdom. Such is our Lord unto us. 
31 Yea, the Nem have been blessed beyond measure. And this is also a blessing unto me, for I am Nem also. And in all that the Nem are blessed and prospered, I do esteem it blessing and prosperity unto myself.
32 And even in my rememberings, of a life long past, which are full of grievous things, yet I do rejoice in my Lord. For all of my sufferings have become joy and all of my pain also. And that field of blood and crimson which I thought was all that I had left in my stead, by which the world must surely have remembered me, He has turned up and made of it as a field of white. Surely, I am the most blessed of men.
33 Wherefore, I do give up this stylus and also all my tools unto my son, Shioni, and I go unto that rest which my Lord shall provide for me. Amen.
________________




THE BOOK OF SHIONI 
THE SON OF MORONI 


CHAPTER 1 
Moroni dies ninety-two years after the end of the Great War. A division among the Nem people between the teachings of Tucantor, and Moroni and the revelations of the Spirit. Shioni writes the words of his father, Moroni, as given in the. High Place 
1 In the ninety and second year from the ending of the Great War between the Nephites and the Lamanites, Moroni gave up the ghost and was laid down to rest with his forefathers. 
2 And he did serve as high priest to his people in all those years, either in the city of Mentina or in his own city. And behold, he did govern the house of the Lord in righteousness. Yea, and he did steward the records of his people and care for them. 
3 But this is not all, for he did many great and noble works during the days of his probation which he did not write about himself. For he was a man of great opinion and confidence, having been trained from his youth to be a leader of men. Nevertheless, he did strive all the days of his life to bend in himself his own arrogance, that he became not puffed up in pride. Yea, he did practice humility in the days of his life and he did earnestly work to nurture kindness in his heart, against the teachings of his youth. 
4 For behold, Moroni was a man of war. Yea, of a necessity, he was brought up in war and he was trained for war. In all the making of the tools of war he was expert and in their use there could be no greater master. Wherefore, even from his youth he was destined to be a captain, even a great general, in the armies of the Nephites. And behold, he did attain to the leadership of their armies, not because he was the son of Mormon, but because he was more accomplished in the workings of war than any other man. And because of this he was elevated rapidly in rank, so that, when his father was killed in battle, he was made ruler over the armies of the Nephites in their final struggle. 
5 Now, can you see the conflict that this experience might create in the heart of Moroni? This was the thing that he was to carry all the days of his life. For, the Nephites prevailed not. And the knowledge of Moroni did not prevail. All the workings of war and the machinations of battle availed the Nephites nothing in the end. Neither did such things afford any advantage to my father when the struggle with the Lamanites ended in disaster. And this thing did my father carry with him for the rest of his life, and it was a struggle for him. 
6 But Moroni bent his own nature and created out of his knowledge of war a wisdom in the use of tools. And this peaceable thing did he make out of the learning he had acquired during his younger years. With this wisdom he did elevate himself again in the eyes of the people. Yea, the Nem saw in him that which was needed by the people in the way of leadership and they did elevate him to the seat of high priest in the stead of Heinmet. And this was the way with him. 
7 For, it is certain that Moroni could not remain in that frame of mind wherein he found himself at the disaster that was the conclusion of the Nephite war. Yea, he had need of a change of heart in order that he might continue to live in the land. Had he not a mighty change of heart, then he certainly could not have lived as long as he did, for the pain of his past experience will have eaten at him day by day, and this will have beaten down his soul and his will to live. 
8 But he bent this nature in him to better purpose. He went from the teaching of war to the teaching of peace. He became a peacemaker in his own city and also in all the cities of the Nem of the mountain places. His preaching was of peace. His walking was in peace. His talking was of peace. And he did preach the kingdom of God in all places, at all times, to all people. 
9 And the people of his own city, even Elak Kowa, did make him their high priest and he did serve them with all his might. But this is not all, he did also utilize his experience in his stewardship and in this were the people greatly blessed and magnified. By his experience, he taught the people to pay more heed to personal purification than to public oblation and that the ordinances had for their purpose to bring the participant unto the Peacemaker, who is Christ, the same who is mighty to save, rather than that the ordinances themselves were a means unto salvation. In this the people became doers of the word and not hearers only. Yea, in this did the people take up the account for their own emergence and they were very much the better for it. 
10 For, during the stewardship of Moroni, there rose up a division of doctrine and it began in the city of Mentina. Yea, in all Meninta there was a division of thought concerning the priesthood and the ordinances, a thing which had never happened before. And some believed as Moroni that the ordinances were for the purpose of bringing souls unto the Peacemaker and that He would lead them and direct them into exaltation. But there were those whose beliefs had been modified by the teacher Tucantor and they believed that salvation comes only through the church and the priesthood. 
11 Now, this difference of belief did divide the people and they did begin to contend one with another. For, the common offering of the people, wherein they did make a consecration of their surplus goods, has always been in the hands of the high priest to administer unto the needy. But, being that there were very few who could be called needy in Mentina, and indeed in all the cities of the Nem, the surplus became very great. Such was the blessing of the manner in which the Nem did choose to live. 
12 But this great surplus gave the management of great wealth into the hands of the high priest, and this did corrupt the minds of many. For because of it, it became possible for the priests and the high priests to live upon the surplus and never lift their hands to any kind of work with their hands, claiming that the demands upon the priesthood were too great to allow for them to labor. And this is the thing which Tucantor taught his followers and he established priests over his flock. 
13 And it had always been the custom that the priests and the high priests were given to use the common offering because they were called upon by the people to a stewardship that took much of their time and prevented them from creating a surplus of their own. Nevertheless, this was never intended to take from them the responsibility to work with their hands alongside the rest of the people. 
14 But the division which did arise among the people on this point of doctrine, which was known by the people as the Tucantorites, as were the people who followed it, did hold that the priesthood was to be given only to men and that their responsibility was only to the ordinances and the administration of the churches, and that they were thus relieved of any other labor. 
15 And the common surplus was so great in some cities that the management of it constituted great wealth and great ability to control the lives of men and women. Yea, he who had the governing of the surplus, by necessity gained a certain amount of power. For, by its use many great things could be accomplished. 
16 But this was not the aim of the Tucantorites. They were men who craved dominion over the souls of men. Yea, they did entice with flattering words many men to come into their fold and to make their offerings to them and not into the common surplus. And they did begin to build up a city within the city and to draw away the people into the gaining of great wealth. 
17 Now, when the leaders of the people do this, how shall the people not follow? With this teaching in their hearts, the Tucantorites began to horde up their surplus unto themselves, just as their high priest did gather in all things unto himself. And as they saw their high priest do, so did they also. 
18 And the high priest taught that only he could confer the priesthood and that it was upon the principles of worthiness that he prescribed and set forth that a man might elevate himself above his fellow men by attaining it. This was the great evil of the Tucantorites and their teachings – that the people could look to mere man to declare their worthiness and had no responsibility for it themselves. And following this principle, every one of the followers of the Tucantorites did judge each their fellow man and they did set themselves up in tiers and in hierarchies. 
19 You can believe it! The followers of this religion did begin to judge each other upon this model also, each declaring to his fellow his righteousness and proving it by the approbation of the high priest and also by the amount of his offering and the importance of his position. For, if the high priest could hold sway over all the people by virtue of his position and because of the ordinances which only he could perform, then every man could do the same with his own stewardship. 
20 And they saw in this a means whereby a caste of workers could be built up and controlled so that they would have no more need of labor. And they calculated to live lives of leisure and of pleasure because of their dominion over the labor of others. 
21 By taking control over who might own the priesthood, the Tucantorites did also seek to take control over the entire city and all the people. For, to control the surplus is to control the stewardships, and to control the priesthood is to control 
the ordinances. Therefore, according to the doctrine of Tucantor, both the temporal and the spiritual life of the people were to be placed under the stewardship of the high priest of the city and of those whom he chose to anoint to the priesthood. 
22 And Tucantor sought to raise himself up as a prophet king and a ruler unto the people, deciding for them what was right both for the maintenance of their bodies and their families and also who might avail themselves of ordinances necessary for salvation, according to his doctrine. This was his design and at first, at least, there were many in Mentina who followed him. It is certain that so many did follow Tucantor in the beginning that the people were divided down the middle, the half believing in the teaching of the new prophet and the other remaining faithful to the doctrine of personal revelation and accountability. 
23 And his priests did not labor for their upkeep, but they did eat the provender given in offering by the believers who did labor. And they became indolent and lazy. And they did pass daily judgment on the people who were given them as their stewardship to shepherd, and very often this judgment was unrighteous and calculated only to edify themselves, that they might be further enriched in their persons. And because of the doctrine of the high priest, only those who were appointed by him could make privilege of the offerings of the people. 
24 In the streets did the followers of Tucantor’s doctrine contend with the people of Mentina. And in the public houses they did contest with their neighbors. And even in the synagogues they did cause disputations and it was not uncommonly done that the Tucantorites would so disrupt the meetings that the people went away with strife in the hearts. And the Tucantorites went from door to door declaring this new doctrine and demanding that their neighbors give to them of their surplus, because that their high priest had once been thrown out of the High Place and made a beggar in the streets. And this was to take advantage of the custom of the people that no beggar was to be allowed to raise up his petition without being heard and answered by the people. 
25 For they did also teach that salvation is only possible through the administration of certain necessary ordinances, and these could only be performed by men unto whom the high priest should give the priesthood. But they went door to door declaring that their prophet had been made a beggar and that if the people failed in their covenant which they had made according to the Law of Consecration, they could not be saved in the Kingdom of God. And they also taught that because the people had made a beggar of their high priest, they had given up all authority to perform ordinances. Indeed, the Tucantorites claimed that the people had exercised unrighteous dominion over their chosen high priest and that this disqualified them for the blessings of heaven and necessitated a regulation of the priesthood and of the church. 
26 But this dissention did not go much further than the city of Mentina. For, Tucantor taught that all authority was held by the high priest of the city, but he could not convince the people that all high priests fell under his stewardship. And his time and energy was taken up preaching to his growing body of followers in Mentina, to the effect that his doctrine had little opportunity to infect very greatly in other places. 
27 Whereas Moroni did have occasion to travel about and to teach in the synagogues and in the councils of the various cities and settlements in Meninta and also in the region immediately north and south of Mentina. And also, because of his relationship with the city of Nespelem, he did also have occasion to visit that region and to teach in their synagogues. 
28 And Micah, the same who called for the council of Mentina to hear the matter of Tucantor, did also travel about to teach the way of the Nem in all the cities. Even out to the Nem of the Plains and to Corianton did he also travel to give word of the things that were taking place in Mentina. 
29 And the teaching of these men was great and powerful to the convincing of the people to retain to what they had received by the Lord and to avoid the teachings of the Tucantorites which came into their ears in diverse manners. For, they were men of great renown and also they taught with the Spirit. And the people believed them because the Holy Ghost did testify to them the truth of their words. 
30 Now, Moroni taught a simple message, and these are the words which he taught whenever he was called upon to open his mouth: 
31 Behold, though a man live to the life of a tree, yet is he felled by time and decay, and though his days shall be long and prosperous, even so are they shortened and come to an end. Wherefore, is long life any test of worth? I say unto you, Nay. The life of man, be it long or short, does not qualify him. 
32 And behold, a man may have many cattle and horses, and his fields may bloom and give forth great abundance. Yea, and his house may be filled with provender and his storehouse overrunning with surplus. And yet, is he well? Does the shaft of death not fell him also as the forester does fell a tree in the forest? What can he buy with grain and beasts when his days are come to an end? I say unto you, All his goods cannot buy him even one day longer than the appointed time. 
33 Yea, and a man may seize upon a wife of great renown, yea, a wife of wisdom and of talents. And without question he may be greatly blessed in the companionship of his wife. Yet, can she with all her talents turn away the shaft of death in the appointed time? 
34 And behold, a man may build him a city with many towers and he may rule that city in righteousness. Yea, his people may make him a king unto them and raise him up a standard and an ensign to the nations of the world. And even such a king may be blessed of the Lord with great wisdom, and great stores of knowledge to the good of all his subjects. Yet, in the appointed time, shall he escape death? 
35 In all things then, the king is the same as the bondservant. Yea, the great and mighty are as the small and the weak and nothing may prevent every one of us from following the same path when the appointed time of the Lord comes upon us. Yea, the first and the greatest have no advantage over the last and the least in the due time of the Lord. 
36 For, though all men become priests and kings, even after the right manner of the Lord, shall they gain sovereignty over that law which the Creator has set before the foundation of the world? I say unto you, Nay. Kings and paupers shall stand in their lot in the hour appointed and no priesthood or kingship shall grant them reprieve. Not even the mightiest man may buy with money, or with fame, or with riches, or with authority, any advantage over any of the children of men. Behold and beware, we shall go when we shall go. 
37 And behold, my good wife may be a Healer and balm my pain and treat my ills all of my life. And in her very accomplished and skillful way she may extend the day of my life but only a moment. And again, with all her talent she may make of my walk a pleasant journey and of my talk a sweetened song. But, when my life has come to the appointed time, can she remove the hour with all her talent and with all goodness? Who can answer me? 
38 Yea, and I may say that I have never wanted for food in all the days of my life, and therefore might I boast that I shall not leave it by starvation. Yet, with all my cattle and all the harvest of my fields, and with all the food on my table and in my storehouse, yea, withal that I do give unto the needy and provide that never a beggar shall stand at my hearth but that I do fill his arms and his belly and let not his entreaty rise up without answer, even so, may I say that the Lord shall take away the hour from me because of all this? Nay. 
39 And though I become as Methuselah of old, or as Father Adam and live nine hundred years or more, behold, I might boast of long life and many days, but will 
the day foretold in the great song of my creation be forestalled because of my great age? 
40 Yea, and in all these things can we lay claim to anything different than that which does also befall all things living? I say unto you, Nay. For, every blade of grass does burst from the earth in the appointed time and it does grow and prosper. And by and by it does give of its grain and its corn does ripen. Then does it cast its seed into the earth and wither. And behold, there is not one blade of grass that is not blown down in the blast and broken with the frost. And the snow does flatten it that it fall down even unto the earth. The same is it with all living things. 
41 Yea, and all wild beasts of the forest and of the mountain do drop their young and they do grow and prosper according as their Creator shall warrant. Yet, do they not also grow ill and halt? And when they do, that same Creator does appoint the hour of their failing and also the manner of their disposition, that not one thing is wasted. 
42 And so it is with horses and with cattle, and with all living things that do walk upon the earth or fly upon the winds or swim upon the waves. There is not one thing unto which the Father has given matter and unto which the Mother has given life that shall not fulfill the measure of its creation. And if it is measured, it shall have its beginning and it shall have its end. 
43 Yea, and though man build his house of solid and durable stone, shall it stand forever? Or how long will it stand? When heaven and earth pass away, shall it remain? I say unto you, Not one stone shall be left standing atop another, for all things have their appointed time and not one thing shall avoid that which has been set in the Creation. 
44 Wherefore, man does not stand alone in the determining of all things, but has an equal portion in all the law of creation. Though a man be more intelligent than they all, yet is he felled as quick, for the bounds of this life are set and few there might be who have recourse from them. They are mighty and strong indeed, but not of themselves. 
45 Yea, even the very House of the Lord, which man shall build because of the commandment of God, yea, even so mighty a house as that, shall not last but shall crumble into the earth out of which it was fashioned. And the Holy City, though it might lay claim to much preservation through many generations of men, even so it does decay, for it is decreed. 
46 And all the beasts of the field, shall live out their appointed lives and fulfill the full measure of their creation. For the Lord has measured and drawn the cord around them all. And behold, He has decreed the times and the seasons thereof. 
47 And the waste places are peopled with the wild beasts and are the space of their days also not measured unto them according to that decree made in heaven when the Lord did mete out their dominion on the earth? Or does the Lord not also know His kingdom and measure it with the cord, and pace the borders around thereof? 
48 And behold, men and women do share all this with the other living things of this creation. And the Creator has given us dominion over all these things, or in other words, the stewardship of them. But, having the stewardship of them, does this mean that we in our carnal state, are ought different from them? I say unto you, Nay, for we are all relations. 
49 For this is the state in which the Creator did make us and He has placed the bounds of this creature condition. But is this all the life of man? Is this that wondrous thing to which we look forward with a brightened and gleaming vision of faith? Is this the crown and the scepter promised to the sons and daughters of the King of Heaven? Nay, I say unto you, that King has provided means whereby His heirs shall inherit His kingdom and emerge from out of their created state. And behold, toward that end, He has given commandments and ordinances to guide us even unto that stature and perfection necessary to steward a greater work than this. 
50 Behold, when a man or a woman undertake to learn the stewardship of the carpenter, do they simply take up the carpenter’s tools and build a lintel? I say unto you, Nay, but they do make themselves an apprentice to the master of the craft. Yea, they do work under the tutelage and mentoring of one who is already great in skill and in knowledge. How is it, then, that men do take up the work and will of the Lord glibly and without forethought? 
51 And the master does assign unto the apprentice tasks to complete which each in its turn do teach principles that are of great importance to the craft. And the apprentice works diligently at the tasks until proficiency is attained. Yea, the apprentice is perfected in each skill by its practice under the watchful eye of the master. And behold, the performance of each task does hone and perfect the skills of the apprentice. 
52 Yea, and the apprentice moves from one skill to another in due course as the master shall decree. And even when the master shall discern a degree of competence and commitment in the apprentice, he does assign that one to assist those less knowledgeable and less skilled so that they also might gain even that which, through steadfastness and diligence, he has obtained. And even in inexperience, yet is experience gained in more than just the working of the wood, but also in the teaching of those who would come after him. 
53 Behold, I say unto you, The Lord is no different in this than the carpenter, or the raddle miller, or the fuller, or the weaver, or the potter, or any other maker of goods. For behold, He does desire that we should become like even unto Himself, the Master. And He does also give us assignments that are designed to give us the mastery of His craft through steadfastness and diligence. And the tasks that He assigns are the commandments, and the manner in which He does call us out to labor and to teach is the priesthood. Can you see how He hones us? Can you see how He perfects us? 
54 And it is obedience unto these things that does begin to change this corruptible into something more refined. Yea, by the Law of Obedience we do accept and learn the Gospel. Wherefore, it is called the Law of Obedience and the Law of the Gospel. And it is by this law that men begin to set aside the natural man and take up that which is spiritual. It is also by this law that men begin to understand that the natural law is part of the celestial world, but that man’s knowledge of it is woefully insufficient. Wherefore, he does begin by performances to exercise a little of the spiritual into the material, and in so doing he discovers God in everything. 
55 And we are not beasts unto the Lord. For, though He loves and saves all the creations of His hands, we are the sons and daughters of God, even His Father and Mother which are in Heaven. Behold, He does surely desire that we emerge out of this corruptible and arise into an incorruptible. Yea, just as a potter does not wish that his apprentice should make wares that crumble in the kiln, so also does the Lord desire that we shall aspire to His stature and become as He is. Wherefore, He does give commandments, the obedience to which shall cause us to arise even unto His stature. 
56 And look! The good master does teach more than just the mechanics of the trade. He is not an evil taskmaster but would have us all become the molders and modelers of talent and of abilities. Yea, He does give us stewardship of the development of others. See how He is concerned that we learn to become like Him in character and not only in skill. For, is the apprentice who learns under the good taskmaster ever the servant of his teacher? Of a surety it is so, for the apprentice becomes as the master. But, shall not the apprentice who learns his skill under the tyrant always wish to be released from his contract? Behold, the Lord is the good taskmaster. 
57 And behold, He does not give commandments because the kingdom has been delivered into His hands. He commands us so that we may learn by principle and by deed what manner of men and what manner of women we ought to become. Yea, He gives commandments for no other purpose. And the priesthood, and the administration of our callings in it, has but one purpose also – it is to teach us how to set down this corruptible and take up the mantle of His mastery. 
58 For behold, in the performance of our duty in the priesthood, we do demonstrate our willingness to keep His commandments and to do His will instead of our own. In this are we perfected in Him. Yea, the roughness of our imperfection is taken off of us one task at a time, just as the stone is squared one blow at a time. 
59 Wherefore is this law part of that great thing that He has revealed unto the prophets and it is part of that great thing which is done in the High Place. Behold, because of it we might strive to become even as He is. This is the thing which He most desires of us, and behold, it ought to be the thing we most desire of ourselves. 
60 Now, do men and women labor only to feed themselves? Behold, I say unto you, Nay. For, of what value is such self-service? Is it enough to strive through life merely to end each day without hunger? Or is there more to living than the filling of the belly? And is life measured by the amount of meal in the bottle or wine in the skin? 
61 For behold, if the wineskin is foul, shall the wine thereof be good for the belly? And no unclean or impure thing may stand in the presence of the Lord, wherefore, how shall a man ever stand there? He must learn to sacrifice of himself freely through serving his fellow man. Verily, this shall cleanse him of his selfishness. 
62 Wherefore, it is by sacrifice that we are made pure. Yea, we do cleanse ourselves of our physical impurities when we do emulate the sacrifice of the Lord. Yea, we do give of our water and of our oil, and yet our cup does run overfull. Behold, in this sacrifice, which is in the similitude of His sacrifice and of woman’s, we do purify ourselves in the body. And this is also the purpose of our fasting and our prayer. 
63 And it is obedience to the observance of these things whereby we become like unto our Lord. And behold, it is called the Law of Sacrifice because of the great sacrifice that He made for all of us. By it we are made more perfect, being able to set aside our needs and wants in order that we may more clearly see the wants and the needs of others. Behold, if we can become as He is, and sacrifice for the sake of all living, then have we learned to live this law more perfectly. 
64 Yea, the Lord did make a sacrifice and did give us this law that we might become like Him in all things. For, women do make this sacrifice for the sake of all living, and in it and through it we have our being. Even He, the greatest of all, did make an emblem of the type and kind of His sacrifice, for it was like unto that rendered for us by all mothers. And so we see that the sacrifice of women is the emblem of our physical sacrifice. Even so is the sacrifice of the Lord an emblem of our spiritual sacrifice. 
65 And behold, the Lord did tread the wine and cleanse the press after Him. Yea, He did make the sacrifice that shall purify us every whit. But we must avail ourselves of His great sacrifice. Yea, we must commit ourselves to become like Him. Behold, if we are the wine of His sacrifice, then let us be pure wine of His own making. Let us do all that we can to do what we see Him do. And does our body suffer ought from the purification after the manner of the Children of Ammon? Can we ever suffer as He did for us? Of a surety not. But we may make an attempt to be like Him who suffered for us. 
66 In fasting and in prayer we do come closer to the true meaning of living. For out of such sacrifice we do create the means wherewith we might also measure out sustenance unto the needy. And does our belly suffer ought because of our fasting? Behold, I say unto you, Nay. But we are the more purified of the corruption of the world. Yea, our body is made more purified. And behold, even our spirit is the more purified, for we have sacrificed not for the sake of our own, but for the sake of the needy. 
67 Wherefore is this not also part of that great thing that He has revealed unto the prophets and also part of that great thing which is done in the High Place? Behold, because of it we might strive to become even as He is by doing the things we see Him do. This is the thing which He most desires of us, and behold, it ought to be the thing we most desire of ourselves. 
68 Behold, did not the Lord teach us that, in the beginning of all things, even in the creation, that man is not without the woman, nor is the woman without the man, but the one working alone brings together but does not create? 
69 It is verily so, that the Father may bring together matter and materials. Indeed, a man may build him a house with rooms for every purpose. Then what? Shall he sit the day long in the house by himself? There is no purpose in this, for a man can just as easily sit alone upon a rock out under the heavens and be as content. 
70 And a woman may bear a child and take it into her arms and give it nourishment at her breast. But how shall she nurture that child without protection? Shall she find a hollow of a tree or a tussock of grass in which to hide her child while she goes out into the wilderness to gather together the stuff of life with which to sustain the fruit of her womb? 
71 Wherefore, a man builds a house and the woman enters into it, and it does provide safety for the little ones. This is family purpose and it is holy. 
72 And it is obedience unto these things that does begin to change the man and the women into something which is unified. Yea, by the Law of Chastity we do also accept and learn the Gospel. And it is by this law that men do bind themselves unto women and women do bind themselves unto men. And this is a thing that must be, if they are to become truly as the Creator. For, without the binding of the Mother and the Father, there is not anything created that is created. And again, by this law men and women begin to understand that the natural law is part of the Celestial world, but that man’s knowledge of it is entirely insufficient. Wherefore, he does begin by performances to exercise a little of the spiritual into the material, and in so doing he discovers God in everything. 
73 The same is the family of God. The Eternal Father gives that endowment of power which does provide place. The Eternal Mother gives the endowment of power which brings life unto all the place. Together they create, and without the two endowments of power there is no creation. 
74 Yea, because of the Mother, we may perceive ourselves and know that we are. Verily, we are intelligent of our surroundings and of the creation because of that which She has given. Yea, it is Her endowment that gives us self-knowing and because of that, we may know who we verily are and what is our place in the Universe. 
75 And behold, because of the Father, we have purpose and function. Yea, there is much that is organized and that will obey the word and will of the Creator. We have our physical bodies and the physical world because of His endowment, and because He has shared His power with us, we are given to duplicate His work. 
76 Wherefore, when a man and a woman make a covenant bond one with another, when their corruptible becomes incorruptible, yea, when heaven and earth pass away, yet shall that bond wherewith they did bind themselves pass not away. For behold, by that endowment of power given us of the Holy Ghost, yea, even that which seals all things unto the Lord which are His indeed, verily we are sealed up also unto Him and become His. Wherefore, that bond by which the man and the woman do bind themselves, and that covenant, are also sealed by this Holy Spirit of Promise and their contract becomes durable, being that it does belong to one who is eternal. 
77 And again I ask you, is this not part of that great thing that He has revealed unto the prophets and is it not part of that great thing which is done in the High Place? Behold, because of it we might strive to become even as He is. This is the thing which He most desires of us, and behold, it ought to be the thing we most desire of ourselves. 
78 But, it is the way of the world that men do purport to own the earth because the Lord did give it unto us. Wherefore, every man thinks that his possessions are given him of God and that his wealth is a blessing from God. But can he truly own the earth? For, it is God’s footstool. 
79 And men do gather unto themselves every good thing and they do esteem themselves mighty because of their many possessions. Behold, they heap up riches and the praise of the world, but is there satisfaction in any of it? Can anything coveted by man save him? 
80 And behold, he does cover himself with every precious thing. Yea, with the fineness of his clothing he does show his greatness unto his neighbor. And he does put on precious things, of gold and silver, and adorn himself with rings and with precious stones and every costly thing. And this is to manifest to his neighbor his high stature. 
81 But behold, the Lord has bid us come out of Babylon and touch not her uncleanness. Yea, we have been shown a more perfect way and we have proven it in our walk and in our talk. Shall we cast aside what He has taught us for a potsherd? Shall we esteem the work of our own hands greater than His majesty? Shall we choose the slavery of the world over that liberty with which He does make us free? 
82 And it is obedience unto these things that does begin to change the man and the community and the family of man into something which is unified. Yea, by the Law of Consecration we do also accept and learn the Gospel. And it is by this law that men and women do prove that they can put aside the Babylon in their hearts and cast off and subdue the natural man. Yea, and we do demonstrate that we are not subject to the bondage of the world. Yea, we do prove that we can be built upon the rock and firm foundation of the Lord and of His house. Verily, this is a thing that must be, if we are to become truly as the Creator. For behold, the Lord cannot establish Zion in any degree of slavery or bondage. Wherefore, how can we say that we are His people, and yet bind ourselves to the world? And again, by this law men and women begin to understand that the natural law is part of the celestial world, but that man’s knowledge of it is entirely insufficient. Wherefore, they do begin by performances to exercise a little of the spiritual into the material, and in so doing, do they not discover God in everything? 
83 And behold, He has loosed the bonds of our indenture. Yea, He has broken the slavery with which we were bound. And every man and woman that walks any street or plies any trade in the cities of the Nem enjoys the same freedom because of the path that the Lord has taught us. Yea, behold, there is not a beggar in all the cities and no one is bound to any other. Behold, He has taken us into His own house and we are adopted of Him. We are become as His own heirs, wherefore, of what value is gold? 
84 Shall not the crown and the scepter be enough for us when He does gather in His household? And what shall gold and silver purchase when all things are naturally provided for our use? And behold, shall the sons and daughters of God esteem each the other differently because of the manner in which they are dressed? I say unto you, Nay. 
85 And what shall be our desire, who enjoy the treasures of eternity? Shall we desire anything bought of money? Or what shall be bought when the Holy Ghost brings all things to our remembrance, and when the Son of God does give unto us all that the Father has? 
86 And I ask you, what kingdom of men shall compare to that glory we shall receive in the kingdom of God? What plot of land, field or parcel shall compare to the mansions that our Lord has spoken of? And shall we not render again all that is His when we come into His presence? Then, I ask you, if it is the best that we can do in this life to come unto Him even in this flesh, is not all that we might amass now but dross? For the world, and all that is, belongs to no mere man, but is the Lord’s footstool. Wherefore, how may a man own the world or even any portion of it? 
87 Behold, I say unto you, These are fundamental principles which are taught in all the scriptures. Yea, they are four basic and foundational precepts upon which all the law and the prophets are built. And is it possible that a man or a woman may learn and perfect these four laws without the priesthood? Can they do this without the church? I say unto you, Yea, it is verily possible, howbeit the more difficult for the lack of them. 
88 Now, I do not mean to speak against such things, but only to say that in their absence the Lord has always provided a means by which the Children of God may accomplish that which they have been commanded to do. Yea, even if it is only that which they received in the first council which was in heaven, barring any other gospel, which shall draw them unto Christ. 
89 For God is no respecter of persons and what He provides for one He does provide for all. And, if He provides a means whereby one might be saved from this corruption, then He surely provides a means whereby all may be saved. For, this is His express purpose, to provide for the perfected state into which He would that His children might come. 
90 And behold, He does give unto some disciples, and unto others prophets. And unto still others He does give priests and teachers and all manner of ministers of many kinds. And it is very often through these ministers that the Lord does teach His gospel, and He does also use them to beckon the people to come unto Him. As also the churches and the synagogues, yea, they also serve this purpose. But, that He does call out His servants that they might further His purpose, does this necessarily mean that He cannot do it without them? Or, is the Lord dependent upon any man in order that His word and will might be carried out unto the children of men? I say unto you, Nay. 
91 For behold, men and women must rely upon the Lord, and upon the peculiar workings of the Holy Ghost, in order to know the truth of anything. And this ceases not to be even when he has given prophets and priesthood. How then shall men decide for the Lord what is true and what is right? And if men may not decide for the Lord what is true, how then shall they decide for other men, being the sons of God? 
92 Behold, He has promised that He shall do nothing without revealing his secrets unto His servants the prophets, of this you may be sure. And you may also be sure that, when such prophets and ministers, yea, the servants of the Lord, do speak by the power of the Holy Ghost, behold, they do reveal unto men and women the very mysteries of God. But does this signify that the mysteries may only be gained through such? Behold, I say unto you, The man who shall teach such things only seeks to take hold upon the yoke of Christ and bind it unto his own oxen. Then does he strive to drive the Lord to and fro. Shall this become the purpose of priesthood? 
93 And where men worship God, they do raise up places where such oblations may be made. Yea, and such places are good for the Lord’s work, inasmuch as they do provide a place for the people to come together in unity. And these places of worship do become of great importance unto the people, for they do demonstrate, at least in part, their dedication to the Lord in the building of their churches and their synagogues. And especially in the constructing of the lodges of the High Place do they honor their God. But does all this building of buildings in order to give honor unto their God signify that they may not honor Him in their homes or in the byways? Behold, I exhort you, never believe it. 
94 For behold, in our first home, yea, even in that creation out of which we came before the world was, we did meet with our Father and we did sit down with Him, and we did honor Him when we received of Him the New and Everlasting Covenant. Yea, the council was of great personal import unto us and we did take it up each one according to our own volition and our agency. Did He command us to obey Him? Nay! But we did hear His plan freely and we did take it up personally. 
95 Wherefore, even without such things as churches and priesthood, we have within us a memory of the things that were accomplished there, and, in the absence of any other help or comfort, surely the Holy Ghost shall bring such things to our remembrance. Or shall we be left alone in a dreary world to find out the truth of all things by the strength of the arm of flesh? Shall we secure eternity upon the wisdom of the wise only? 
96 On the contrary. Behold, the Lord does provide all people in all times the means whereby they might seek His face personally. And He does give four great tasks and commandments unto the children of men. And, if they do avail themselves of these commandments, observing to keep them and to strive to perfect them, then are they taken speedily upon the Way. And behold, you may believe it, when you shall walk upon the Way with the wind beneath your feet, you shall see even the very face of God. Yea, you shall have come even unto Him as He has always beckoned His children to do, and you shall receive of Him all things that shall be necessary for you. Yea, when the Lord is your guide, and when the Lord is your mentor and teacher, do you believe that you shall lack anything? Do you believe that any other person might be the bringer of greater light and greater truth than that which the Lord and the Holy Ghost together might bring you? Nay, but believe it not. For, mere man has not all things before him, as the Lord surely does have. Wherefore, we must come unto Christ in order that we might be presented at the veil, in order that we might converse again with the Father face to face. 
97 This is the plan, even the great purpose of the Lord our God, and shall any man, no matter his priesthood, bring us closer to the Father than Him? Shall any man have greater doctrine or teachings? Shall any ordinance do more to demonstrate that we do draw ourselves nigh unto Him than that we stand in His mighty presence? Behold, where can such nonsense be believed? 
98 Wherefore, you Nem, believe it not when a man comes to your door and declares to you that you may only receive that which is necessary for salvation’s sake from some man or set of men. Believe it not when such men come into the synagogue and preach unto you a gospel of troubles. Let not such provocations enter into your hearts. 
99 And when self-sustaining and self-serving men do seek to change the doctrine of peace, do not strive with them, but strive only with the Spirit. For, if you maintain that promise which the Lord has given you, do you think that He will leave you comfortless in the time of trouble and of uncertainty? I say unto you, Nay. He shall surely speak to you. Wherefore, you shall have no purpose in strife with your fellowman on account of the gospel or of gospels. Seek the face of God and the disturber shall give you no pause. 
100 And when you are accused of creating a beggar out of that man who shall continually rebel against the Lord, behold, give him of your surplus but only as much as will fill his immediate needs. Yea, feed him but for that day only and you shall fulfill righteousness. But give not the stewardship of your surplus into his hands who shall claim it by right of priesthood. 
101 And behold, when a man does strive to usurp ought that has been given from on high, do not give him of your time or your attention. Nay, strive not with him at all, for his argument is wickedness. Wherefore, how shall you properly steward the precious time the Lord has given you in contending with him who shall speak nonsense? For, has the Lord Himself not taught certain things plainly? Then why shall we spend our time justifying His words in repetition? 
102 And in all things let us hold true to those precious principles that He has taught us. Do you doubt the words of the scriptures? Then I exhort you, put them to the test. Inquire of the Lord concerning the object of your doubt. Do you believe that He shall not answer you because that He has spoken unto others already? Behold, this is folly, for who shall decide for the Lord but Himself when He is finished speaking and when He shall say no more to any man. Is it within you to dictate unto whom He shall give instruction, be you great or small? I say unto you, Nay. 
103 And when a man shall declare unto you that the Lord is a respecter of persons, and that He does give unto some and that He does withhold His word and His will from others, you may believe that such a one is a thief and a robber. Yea, he is a liar and puts words in the Lord’s mouth, even dishonorable words. For behold, shall a man turn unto his Lord to speak to Him if he does not also strive to do away with his sins? Can he think to come unto God in any state of wickedness? And should any man or woman be denied access to a forgiving Lord? Or is His love so conditional? 
104 Behold, sit at the feet of prophets and of teachers and be instructed of them. But do not rely upon them for ought that you think might be important for salvation. Nay, you cannot surrender your personal responsibility in this thing to any man. Shall he declare unto you that you must or you give up your salvation, do but render unto him of your courtesy in return, but not of your confidence. For such a one boasts of private knowledge and seeks to regulate God and His goodness. Behold, a true prophet of God shall never place himself an obstacle between the Lord and His children. 
105 For, the Nem know, and I shall hope that all them who would lay claim to belief in Christ do also know, whereunto they shall look for their salvation. And it is not to any man, but only unto that Holy One who is mighty to save. Or can any man save a single hair on your head? I say unto you, To have confidence in the strength of the arm of the flesh shall bring disappointment. 
106 For when all people sit at the feet of the Lord for their teaching, and when all people are instructed of the Lord in matters of doctrine and of understanding, behold, they shall all have become prophets and seers. Yea, they shall speak with the tongues of Angels and shall sit them down even on the right hand of God forever. Is there greater doctrine to be learned anywhere in the world than this? And is there any greater teacher to teach this doctrine than the author of it? 
107 And with these words did Moroni teach in the temples, in the churches and in the synagogues. 


CHAPTER 2 
1 And Moroni did travel from city to city, and from settlement to settlement, in all the regions of the Nem of the Mountains, and even he did travel out to the West Sea, and he did preach this message unto all the people. 
2 And the people did esteem his message of great worth. For, it did cause them to remember the purpose of the gospel in their lives – that it should not become a means whereby men and women are enslaved, but that they might receive of it that through which the Lord does liberate His children. 
3 Now, when he undertook to travel away from his own city, he did so in the warm months, for the roads were not always safe to travel at other times. And he did take with him trusty men, men whom he had known for many years. And some of these men were among those who had fought beside him in the Nephite war. Yea, they went in a body of twelve and they called themselves the Traveling Council of Peli. And they did all things in unity and they had all things in common. 
4 And now and then, they divided themselves so that they might go and visit many cities and settlements at once. And when they did this, they did divide into threes, and they went three by three. But when they entered into any city, they did greet the people in the name of the Lord and in the name of the Traveling Council of Peli. And thus they became known unto all the people in the region. 
5 And when they were accepted by the council of a certain community, they did offer ceremony and oblation in the presence of all the people. They did offer up sacred smoke after the manner and pattern of Moroni, and they did lead out in the Purification of the Ammonites. Yea, they did make a sacred suffering with all the people who would celebrate this sacrifice with them. 
6 In many of the places whereunto they did visit during their travels, they found no reason to make any regulation, or in other words, when they met in council with the men and women of that city, they saw nothing about which they might make any suggestion, and they celebrated with the people in the Spirit. Nevertheless, they did always preach the message that Moroni had taught them and this did unite them with all the people. 
7 Now, they did not go unto the people in order that they might convince them of one viewpoint over another. They went because they were driven by the Spirit. And it was not in order that they might combat Tucantor and his rebellion, for his teachings did not travel much outside of Mentina at that time. But they did travel unto all the places in the mountains all the way unto the West Sea, and even they did teach some who came over from among the Nem of the Islands, in order that the cities might be more united and that greater contact might be established between them. Yea, they desired that the people might be more unified in their understanding of the gospel and unto this end did they travel from city to city. 
8 And they were not disappointed in their desire. For there had not been much done along this line for many generations. Now, do not think that the people had not enjoyed communion with other cities, but their lives were so much tied to their own city and their own stewardship that they had little opportunity to travel about and visit other cities and other settlements except to transport goods. 
9 Wherefore the traveling council gave the people of the scattered cities of the Nem an opportunity to hear and to honor teachers from other places. And this did cause them to esteem the Nem as one nation and one people. 
10 And the traveling council did prove to the people that they could live in diverse places upon the land and yet have security and unity because of their unity in the covenants and commitments they had all made to live the way the Lord had taught them. Indeed, because of the traveling Peli, they did not feel isolated one from another. 
11 And also when the people saw that the traveling Peli taught the oblations, sacraments and ordinances that were taught by the Lord and by Timothy and his brethren, they were the more unified in their teachings, even so much so that they did also take up their concentration upon the four great covenants of the High Place. Yea, and in every place where the traveling Peli sojourned, they did assist the people in building the High Place and in setting up the performance of the ordinances there. 
12 The traveling Peli became renowned in all the land because of their knowledge and because of the great spirit with which they did teach the discourse that Moroni had taught them. And whenever they were gathered in any one place, they did observe to teach in unison, never differing in their discourse. Yea, they did pray together, and they did fast together. They did observe the Purification of the Ammonites together and they did participate together in the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper. They were a body and a band of perfect unity and they had all things in common. 
13 And it was for this cause that Moroni did make his journey unto the various cities of the Nem. For he esteemed it the best work that he could do. And what other work could there be of greater import than that we wear out our lives in the service of the Lord and of His children? This, verily, is the thing that Moroni taught and his life became an example unto us all. 
14 And they who went with Moroni, or also they who were sent by him unto the cities, did this walking service because of the great love they had for their Lord and also for their brothers and sisters of the Nem. They did not do it because of the esteem of the people. For, who knew them before that they had visited their cities? Nay, they set out because they loved their God and the Spirit had testified mightily to them of the rightness of the mission. And also they set out because they loved the Nem and desired not that they should dwindle in unbelief because of the whisperings and conspiring of evil or misinformed men. 
15 And this took place throughout the stewardship of Moroni and it became a great work. For the Nem unified once again into a great nation under the influence of this great Peli and high priest. And to write all of his doings and all of his works would fill up many volumes, wherefore, he did not write much of his own doings in his own record. And also he felt not to praise himself for his own works. Such was his humility. 
16 Nevertheless, Moroni is known throughout the land as one of the greatest prophets of the Nem and it is for this reason that one may see his mark in many places written into the stones. Yea, he became a hero unto the people and most especially unto the young men who found in the traveling councils and the walking service a mission for themselves and a means whereby they might serve the nation as a whole and not only their own community. 


CHAPTER 3 
1 Now Moroni, even that same man who was known unto the Nephites as Moroni, son of Mormon, did live and serve the Lord all the days of his life. And he lived one hundred and forty two years and he did give up the ghost. 
2 And in his stewardship he did see the reuniting of the Nem of the Mountains. For behold, the Great War had caused the Nem cities to become distant and dividing in some things. Wherefore, the Nem were not of one heart and one mind in all things and, although they did provide for their own people in their own regions, they had ceased for a time to interact as a unified nation of communities. This spirit was restored to the Nem because of the ministry of Moroni. 
3 For the cities did begin to send once again their representatives unto Elak Kowa to the Great Councils. And they did also begin to organize again into the General Councils. Wherefore, groups of cities did meet in councils as Nem and not merely for their own communities. 
4 And following the example set by Moroni, many cities did also begin to send out their own Traveling Councils of Peli to visit other cities. Now, this is the thing that did begin to most unify the cities one to another. For, the people began to know each other by this mobilizing of their young men and women and it became a great blessing unto the people. 
5 Now, also it must be written and recorded here that, because of the teachings of Moroni and because of the message that he sent by his own voice and also by the voice of the traveling Peli, the cities did undertake to construct their own temples. And the ordinances of the High Place were spread to all the cities and many of the settlements of the Nem of the Mountains. 
6 One of the purposes of the Traveling Council of Peli was to instruct the people in the building of the Lodges and also to assist them in setting up and performing the ordinances. Yea, the young people did go forth and teach the Nem not only principles of the High Place but also in the actual performing of the ceremonies. 
7 And being so united in purpose, and also having their attention brought back unto the principles of salvation, the people and the councils of the cities and the settlements did also begin to step out once again in the performance of their civic duties. Yea, they did become more effective in their own councils and also they did become more active in the councils of the nation as a whole. 
8 And thus we see how the great captain of the Nephite armies was instrumental in bringing into balance all that had been disturbed because of the war and the threat of war. 
9 In this did Moroni teach a vital message of healing unto all the people. For, did not the people pass from a condition of war even unto a condition of peace? And did they not pass from a condition of doubt and despair unto a condition of confidence and of hope? And, whereas the disunity that arose out of the great preparations for war did threaten to undue the nation, the unity that arose out of the building up of the High Places in all the land did promise to edify the nation. Behold, this is healing. Yea, it is the healing of a nation, and it is in this healing that all people may emerge from one state into another. 


CHAPTER 4 
1 Now, all that Moroni did in the days of his stewardship is written in another book. But I have written somewhat more concerning him because of the great respect and honor which I hold for him in my heart. Behold, I am Shioni Akek and I am his son. 
2 And when my father had gone unto his ancestors, the council of Elak Kowa did bid me return unto the city of my father. For they did desire to raise me unto the seat of high priest. And I did accept the calling with the approbation of all the city. 
3 Some would call this a great honor done unto me by the people of the city. For, whereas the city of Mentina had for many generations held a predominant position among the cities of the mountains and was considered to be the capital city of our nation, because of the Tucantorites, Mentina was no longer considered such and the Great Council was moved to Elak Kowa. 
4 And because of this transfer of the sentiment of the people, the high priest of Elak Kowa was made to preside over the Great Council. Wherefore, in accepting the calling of high priest of my own city, I did also accept a call to be the father of my nation. Or, in other words, the people did raise a voice of Common Consent that I should take charge of the High Place, the archives and of the surplus of the nation. 
5 This did anger many of the residents of the city of Mentina. For, they had, the half of them, taken up the doctrine of Tucantor and were not desirous that the importance of their city and of their high priest be lessened. And because the Common Consent of the residue of the inhabitants of the valley of Meninta did desire it, and the other cities did concur, the capital was relocated unto Elak Kowa. And the surplus that the cities sent to the capital no longer flowed into the storehouses at Mentina, but they did come unto Elak Kowa instead. 
6 And the Common Consent of the people is the rule of law among the Nem. There has been a body of laws formed in Mentina in times past. Indeed, the great prophet and high priest Pa Nat did labor diligently with the community council to form laws consistent with the manner in which we do live. But it was not Pa Nat who made the laws binding unto the people. Rather, it was the by the Common Consent of the people that the laws became enforceable. This is the basis of our community and our way of life. 
7 Howbeit, even though the transfer of the capital and of the surplus was done by the Common Consent, nevertheless, the Tucantorites of Mentina did stir the citizens of that city up into anger at the rest of the Nem and they did begin to cry out against us. Yea, and they did withhold from the donation all the surplus from the region round about Mentina. 
8 And they did also withdraw their counsel from the Great Council and did not send any delegates from Mentina. Because of this, there could be no vote and no election upon the points of counsel, for there could be no Common Consent of the people without that the people have opportunity to vote. 
9 Now, this became a great burden unto me, for I did not wish to be the cause for the disintegration of the peace in Meninta. But the division was great in the city of Mentina and all the people round about were at a loss to discover how it might be resolved. 
10 And I did call for a Great Council to convene in Elak Kowa to hear the matter. And because the matter concerned Mentina so particularly, they did send two delegates to the council. Now, one of the delegates was of the doctrine of Tucantor and one was not, and they did represent their city. And every city and settlement also sent delegates to take part in the council and hear the matter. 
11 And the delegates for Mentina were Hemeacum and Micah, even that same Micah who went unto the cities of the plains and of the lake country in the east to preach the message of Moroni. And Micah did stand before the council first and I did recognize him. And when he had taken up the staff, he did open his mouth to speak unto the great council. And these are the words of his speaking: 
12 Behold, I am Micah, of the city of Mentina, of the valley of Meninta, and I am a descendent of Oug and of Hagoth. I do stand up before this council to express the grievance of my city, for she has been sorely injured by this people. Yea, even all the Nem of the Mountains have injured the city of Mentina and all of her citizens. 
13 For, has not Mentina been considered the capital city of the Nem since the day that Hagoth built her? And does not every city and settlement of the Nem owe a debt of gratitude to her? And has not the surplus of all the cities ever flowed down into her storehouses since the Nem came into this country? And has not Mentina been gracious unto all, bestowing the surplus for the good of all? 
14 Howbeit now, after all that Mentina has done for the building up of the Nem and our way of life, can the people arbitrarily take from her the right of principal city? Has she not been a gathering place in all of our days? Has she not been an ensign to the nations? How can she be thus abused and thus dethroned? 
15 It is for this cause that Mentina has sent its delegates to this great council, to decry this injury and to demand that her right as principal city be returned to her. 
16 And Hemeacum did also stand upon his feet and he did request the staff. And I did grant him the staff that he might speak uninterrupted according to our custom. And he did address the council, saying: 
17 I also bring you greetings from Mentina. I am Hemeacum, and I too descend out of Father Hagoth. I too bring cause against this council for injury done to my city. For, the high priest of all the land has always been seated in Mentina. This is a tradition that has been passed down through many generations. Behold, it is the right of the city and the usurpation of it is not to be admitted. Yea, the high priest of the city of Mentina, even the high priest of all the lands of the Nem does demand that you return to him the keys and the surplus. For, the management of the surplus is his by right and by authority. Who are you that you think to take away from him what is rightfully his? 
18 And after this manner did the delegates for Mentina address the council. And I did take up the staff and I did stand also to speak before the council, saying: 
19 Behold, I am Shioni Akek. And my father was Moroni, the same who was Captain of the armies of the Nephites and who was also high priest in Mentina and in Elak Kowa. The people did make him to sit in the seat of high priest and he did fill his stewardship with honor. The same was my tutor and my mentor. 
20 Now, let us consider this matter carefully. For, as I see it, there are two principles at stake here. For the one part, we must consider whether Mentina, or any city for that matter, may have predominance over any other and whether the law comes of the Common Consent of all the Nem or is it to be determined by each city for its own residents. On the other part, we must consider the doctrine of Tucantor and the division it has caused in the valley of Meninta and most especially in Mentina. To my mind, these are the principles that must be examined. For they shall dictate the very complexion of our society hereafter. 
21 Let us take the first matter and examine it fully, perchance we may all come of a unity of mind and spirit concerning it before we discuss the second. Micah and Hemeacum shall speak for the city of Mentina. Let us recognize the delegates from the other cities of the Nem. 
22 And one by one the delegates stood upon their feet in the midst of the council and they did declare themselves. 
23 Midgan Idi, of the city of Elak Kowa did stand first and he did introduce himself, saying: 
24 Behold, I am Midgan Idi, the son of Idiancom, a Nephite who did stand with Moroni in the last battle of the Great War, and Pa Naest, a descendant of Hemen and I do represent the city of Elak Kowa. 
25 And Da-In, of Elak Kowa did stand up next, saying: 
26 I am Da-In and I descend from the Lamanites. I did leave the Great War, for I grew weary of the shedding of blood, and Moroni did adopt me into his band and family. I do also represent Elak Kowa. 
27 And the delegates from Potal did stand, saying: 
28 Behold, I am Kamiakim and this is my companion Toniah Lotnah. We are descendants of Hagoth and we represent the city of Potal. 
29 And the delegates from every city did stand forth and declare themselves one by one. And the names of the delegates I do record here in the order in which they did stand to be recognized. And they were: 
30 Nohonaya and Pa Sineth of the city of Elgiah; Parah and Nomiah Min, of the city of Pagwit; Monoriah and Mineat of Hagoth; Pingwit and Kayith of Sevim; Pa Wayat and Panah Nin of the women’s refuge of Korinah; Ealekoet Akek and Kochets Kunnin of Nespelem; Peliah and Beleuh of the Pahshi settlement of Porinor; Tlin Gee-it and Tso-Tsit of the city of Tliningsah and of Haydats; Rhen and Kaboret of the city of Witchittim and Kodahah; Megnem and Pa-In-Nah Waylit of Corianton and Winebag; Phaynith-Im and Phenith of the new settlement of Phenith Ee-it. 
31 And delegates from all the cities were present, but these were the delegates chosen by election to speak in the Great Council and to hear the cause that had been brought forth. And they did choose for themselves who would speak and who would not. Wherefore, the council was convened according to the traditions of our people, yea, even in the manner in which our first fathers did set as an example unto us. 
32 And I did call upon Micah to step forward to speak on behalf of his city in the examination of the first consideration and Hemeacum to speak for the second. And Micah arose from his place and strode into the center of the circle and he did address the council, saying: 
33 Brothers and sisters, Nem! I honor you and I am grateful that I should have this opportunity to stand up for my city and speak on behalf of her citizens. Behold the high priest of the city of Elak Kowa does do me great honor and I thank him. 
34 Behold, has the city of Mentina not always been the central city in this region? And have the laws that have been adopted by all the cities of the Nem not flowed out of Mentina since the very beginning of our sojourn here in the Land Northward? I say unto you, Yea. For, do we not have it in the records of our people that Pa Nat did write the laws and the statutes by which we do govern ourselves? Surely, none may question that it has been from out of Mentina that the call for the Great Council has come in the past. 
35 Yea, and is the temple at Mentina not the first temple to be built in the Land Northward? And was it not in Mentina where the records of the people were compiled and kept? Indeed, have we not ample record that visitors from far away lands, even from across the East Sea and from across the West Sea, have traveled long just to arrive in Mentina? Is it possible that any might deny the sacred role that the city of Mentina has played in the very history of our people? 
36 Behold, the surplus of all the cities has been sent unto the high priest of Mentina for many generations and has the high priest not distributed the surplus wisely? I say unto you, that he has. 
37 Wherefore then, shall the privileges of the principal city of the Nem be taken from her? Behold, this is the question that I raise before this council. 
38 And when Micah had made an end of speaking, he did sit down again in his place. 
39 And Midgan Idi did arise and the council did recognize him. And he did open his mouth to speak, saying: 
40 I too am honored that I might speak before this council and also that so great a man as Micah should condescend to give me the stand. And I should like to address the questions raised by Micah. Wherefore, I do beg his indulgence and also that of this council. 
41 For I do not believe that anyone who has come here today can deny any of the things which Micah has said about the city of Mentina. Of a surety, we must all admit that it was the first of the settlements of our people, after Hagoth took his people up into the mountains. And I think that none shall stand to deny that Mentina has been a very principal and even capital city of our nation. 
42 And it is also quite true and full of proof that Pa Nat’s record of the Laws of Mentina have been the model for most of the laws by which the Nem do govern themselves. And it is also without equivocation that Pa Nat was the high priest of Mentina when she recorded the laws. 
43 And there is no question that the first of the temples built by the Nem of the Mountains was built in Mentina, for it was the first of the cities. Wherefore, where else shall the Nem of the Mountains have built their first temple in the new land, but in the first city? 
44 Yea, and we must all admit that Mentina has been a destination for many men and women of great wisdom and knowledge who have come from many parts of the world. For behold, the archives are in the valley of salt and they are preserved there. Yea, and it has always been one of the duties of the high priest of Mentina to keep the archives and who sits here who will deny this? 
45 But behold, I would ask this council, because a thing has ever been, does it signify that it shall or must always be? Is the city of Mentina the only place among the Nem where the voice of the people may raise up a council of all the people? And what are the privileges that one city may claim over another? Is any piece of land any different than another? Is it the plot of land upon which we are established, or is the field our foundation? I say unto you, Let us very carefully discharge our duty here today, for the Common Consent of the people is the matter that is being contested. 
46 I know that Micah does feel for the dignity of his city. Behold, long has Mentina been the center of our society. But behold, the voice of the people has brought about a change in things. Shall the tradition of our fathers supersede the Common Consent of the people? I hope that this shall not prove to be so, for it will become the ruination of all that we know. 
47 Behold, my city is new. Yea, Elak Kowa has seen scarcely two generations of habitation. Has it become a principal city because of its history? I think not. There has not been enough of it to warrant such an honor. What then? Does it contain men and women who are in any way greater or wiser than they who live in other cities? Again, I think not. We are all relations and none of us are ought different than the citizens of any of the cities of the Nem. 
48 What then has elevated Elak Kowa to become the capital of the nation? Behold, I will tell you. It is not because of wealth, neither is it because of greater knowledge or wisdom. Elak Kowa has become the gathering place of the Great Council only because of the Common Consent of the people. Behold, the people decided by vote that Elak Kowa should become the capital and if the people next week shall decide otherwise, then some other city would lay claim to this honor. 
49 It is not history or tradition or the law or the temple that decides these things, but the Common Consent of the people. For, it is because of the Common Consent that we may say that we have all things in common. Yea, it is by the Common Consent, is it not, that we have come out of Babylon, not because of the traditions of our fathers. For I would that you might recall that our lineage does not begin with Hagoth. Indeed, the Nephites were our fathers as well. Did they do all things by Common Consent? Behold, I say unto you, Nay. 
50 Micah would have us believe that the good of the nation hangs upon the privileges bestowed by history and tradition unto the city of Mentina. But I say unto you, The good and the future of our very way of life hangs not upon the good name and reputation of but one city, but rather upon the steadfastness of all the Nem in upholding the standard set by the founders of Mentina. If we bow to the will of one city and place it higher in stature than all the rest merely because of its history, then we shall have created a tyranny that shall destroy the nation. 
51 I do not plead that pre-eminence be given to my own city. Take the honor from Elak Kowa if having it shall create discord in the nation. Yea, give it to another city if having it shall threaten to puff its citizens up in the pride of their hearts! Nay, I do not beg for any such honor to dishonor the people of Elak Kowa. 
52 But behold, we ought to examine the reason that the honor was taken from Mentina and given unto another. Is Mentina unified? Do they have all things in common within their own city? Can a council be elected that shall not be divided against itself? Behold I say unto you, The city is split down the middle and there is contention on every corner. How then shall the rest of the nation rely upon a factious city to distribute equitably the sacred surplus of all the cities? 
53 For behold, does such division exist in any other city but Mentina? I say unto you, Nay. Examine every delegate in this council today and you will find no such division. But if Mentina and the high priest of Mentina is to have control over the general surplus, could that not become the means whereby that same division which does destroy the unity of Mentina might be spread from city to city? And is this wisdom? 
54 Wherefore, the wisdom of the General Councils is plainly manifest in its recommendation to the people that the surplus be transferred out of the center of the dispute. And the Councils did ask for the Common Consent of the people. Did the people consent to retain the surplus in the ancient capital? They did not. Behold, they saw clearly the threat to the public peace. 
55 There was no slight intended and no injury made upon the people of Mentina. But the security of the way of life which all the cities have chosen was of primary concern and the people did decide the best course of action. The people of Mentina are not forced to accept the Common Consent if they no longer wish to live by this law. Yea, they may leave the union and be a nation unto themselves if this is their desire, for the rest of the cities do not seek to impose that upon Mentina of which its citizens do not approve. Wherefore, where is the injury? 
56 And when Migdan Idi had made and end of speaking, behold, Micah was abashed. For he had supposed that the people had removed the capital to Elak Kowa in order to punish the people of Mentina because they had allowed the Tucantorites to remain in their midst. But this was not the case and when he had discovered that he suspected them in error, his eyes were opened to his own pride and to the pride of the city. Wherefore, he forebore from speaking any more in the council. 
57 But Hemeacum did stand to be recognized, saying: 
58 Behold, my companion has given up the matter, being altogether put down by the words of Migdan Idi. But I am not put down, nor discouraged from the cause. Mentina has indeed been injured and all her people with her. For there is but one authority on earth whereby the people ought to be governed. Let us be clear on this matter. Men may call councils and they may contrive to govern the kingdom of God as they see fit. But in all that they do, if they have not the mandate of heaven, they do err greatly. 
59 It is only upon the principles of the priesthood that the cities ought to be governed. When the people are in accord with those whom God calls into the ministry, they become of one heart and one mind with God, and they have all things in common. This principle is not based in carnal man and it is not founded on the laws of men. It is an eternal principle and any who tries to circumvent it does commit sin. It makes no difference whether such a one is an individual man or set of men, or even the whole nation. When the mandate of heaven is breached, surely the Lord will not hold the malefactor harmless. 
60 Migdan Idi asks where the injury is found. Is this not injury unto God, unto the city of Mentina and unto all the Nem together? Behold, the matter at hand will decide the doctrine by a vote of the people. Shall the people decide in this way the nature of God? I say unto you, All the councils of the nation could not change God in any way. How then, shall they change any other doctrine? 
61 The Law of Consecration is a principle given in the High Place. Therefore, it is not a political matter, but a doctrine of our religion. Shall the councils decide our doctrine for us? If so, what might prevent them from forming combinations to take away our ordinances and our observances? Behold, I say unto you, There is nothing to prevent the disintegration of our culture and our society, yea, it shall bring upon us a separation from God. This is the injury. 
62 Behold, God chose the city of Mentina as the seat of His church. Yea, He did cause that our forefathers should depart from the Land Southward and reestablish His church and His kingdom here in this blessed place. And He has blessed us beyond compare because we have followed Him. Shall we begin now to change His dictates and His commandments? 
63 By the voice of the people the center of the church has been moved to Elak Kowa. Because of this change, the general surplus, the means through which God does build up His church, has been taken from His chosen high priest. What shall we change next? 
64 This misconception has already changed one sound doctrine of the church and turned it to nonsense. When we give unto the mind and will of the people to dictate the doctrine of the church, we sentence our culture to extinction. 
65 And when Hemeacum had said these words, he surrendered the stand and took his seat. And when he had returned to his seat, Tso Tsit did stand up to be recognized, saying: 
66 Behold, I am Tso Tsit and I am a descendent of Hagoth. I do give all honor unto this council and I do stand to speak for the Nem. 
67 This question does concern me greatly. For, if Hemeacum is considered correct in his interpretation of things, then all that we do in the cities is in error. Wherefore, let us look at the manner in which we of the outlying cities have traditionally governed ourselves. 
68 Behold, the settlements are formed because some small group of Nem do chose to leave the city of their habitation and strike out into the wilderness to form other communities. And the new community does meet together and a Community Council is formed following the pattern given by our ancestors. 
69 Yea, we do ask our mothers to nominate the names of those they wish to sit in the council. And the people do vote on the names and they become the Community Council by the Common Consent of the people. And this council does elect a high priest from among the Peli of the families of the group to act as the keeper of the records and to have the care and keeping also of the surplus of the city. And now that the High Places are built in all the cities, it has also become part of the stewardship of the high priests and the Peli to have the keeping and the care of it and of the synagogues. 
70 Now, this has been the manner in which the Lord has called up men and women to serve the people ever since my city has been. And behold, we know that this custom has been passed down to us from generation to generation and it has also been confirmed by the records of our people which we do open and read often. 
71 Wherefore, we do believe that the Lord does call the Peli personally. It is from among the Peli that the Community Council does call the high priest. This high priest does call and train priests and teachers to serve in the churches, but they are also sustained by the people. 
72 Wherefore, as may be plainly seen, the Lord does call up His servants in our city by a set order. Now, Hemeacum, would you change all this which has gone on in our city since its inception? And if so, upon what grounds and by whose authority do you seek to dictate the beliefs and customs of a people who have been organized almost as long as the city of Mentina? I say unto you, Neither the people nor the high priest of Mentina have authority to dictate anything that is done in another place and among another people. 
73 But I also defy you to establish by the records that the city of Mentina has chosen its Community Council or it high priest in any other way. Behold, we know that you are of the Tucantorites and it is out of this doctrine that you derive your interpretation. It is a system of doctrine that is at variance with the rest of the Nem, even in your own city. Shall the Great Council be governed by a small group of Nem in one city, or shall the Common Consent be preserved? 
74 Let us decide first the manner in which this council shall govern itself. Shall we change our tradition because of the teaching of Tucantor, or shall we retain the Common Consent as we have understood it to this date? Let us vote on this matter before we proceed. 
75 And when Tso Tsit had made an end of speaking, he did take his seat again. And it did seem that he was correct in his call for a vote of the council, for how could any Great Council proceed without an agreement upon the basis and foundation of the council? Wherefore, I did call for a vote upon the question of Common Consent. And the delegates of the council did cast their lots and the vote fell upon the Common Consent. 
76 Behold, every delegate except Hemeacum did vote in favor of retaining the Common Consent as it had theretofore been interpreted. And when they had all cast their lots and I had counted the vote, I did give the lots to the scribe of the council to count and to record. And when the scribe had counted the votes also and witnessed the result, behold, Hemeacum did arise once again to be recognized, saying: 
77 Behold, I stand up before this council to protest the evil that you have thrust upon the Nem. You have circumvented the word and will of God. Do you suppose that this voting shall have changed anything in creation? I say unto you, It has not. There is nothing that men may do or say that can change the will of God. This Great Council does only teach the people that they may place themselves above the commandments and this is an evil that you will all carry with you and a sin which you must account for in the dreadful day of judgment. Yea, behold, I would not be any of you when you must stand before the Lord in that day. 
78 Now, let me instruct you, perchance you might wish to repent. When the Lord has spoken a thing through His chosen prophet, behold we may demonstrate our faith and loyalty unto Him by raising up our hands to sustain the words of the prophet of God. But shall we hear the voice of God through His prophet and elect through the Common Consent which of His commandments we will obey and which we will cast to the wind? 
79 But this is exactly what this council has done. Behold, the voice of the Lord has been heard already in this matter and the will of the Lord has already been spoken by His prophet. If any of you think that you can countermand any of his words, let him account for it unto God. 
80 And when Hemeacum had said these words, he left the council. Wherefore, I did ask Micah to stand and express his sentiments concerning the matter. And behold, he did arise from his seat and walk down even into the center of the council chamber. And he addressed the council, saying: 
81 Behold, I am not of the same religion as my fellow delegate and I do not agree with him in this matter. Of course, I do not believe that anything that we might say or do in this council will change anything in the creation and with regard to the will and word of the Lord, there is nothing that we can accomplish in the councils to change or circumvent the commandments of God. But the doctrine of Tucantor does corrupt even the half of the people of my city and they do believe it. I fear that they will not accept anything this council might decide. 
82 But I do believe in the rule of the Common Consent. Behold, I did cast my lot and if this council shall still consider me able to speak in behalf of at least that portion of the people of the city of Mentina who are not of the Tucantorites, then I shall be honored to remain in the council and do my duty to my city. 
83 And when Micah had said this, he resumed his seat. Wherefore, I did call for the voice of the council concerning the Common Consent, and behold, the council did elect to retain the practice of returning the decisions of the council unto the people for their sustaining vote. And when the vote was taken and recorded, I did arise from my seat and I did address the council, saying: 
84 The decision of the Great Council is that the Nem shall retain the traditions and customs of the councils with regard to the Common Consent. And that is, that matters shall be heard in the councils and when a decision has been reached, it shall be published to the people. Verily, the voice of the people shall decide whether a thing becomes the law of the land or not. 
85 Therefore, it was decided by the Great Council that one city shall not dictate to any other what their law might be, but that the Great Council shall give recommendations unto the cities and the people ought to decide what their laws shall be of themselves. 
86 And we did take up the doctrine of Tucantor to discuss it. And the delegates did discuss the matter for many days. And it was determined that no effort ought to be made to correct the Tucantorites by the law, but that those who felt their doctrine to be incorrect ought to diligently teach as the Spirit directed and that this ought to be the only action taken. Finally, when they had made an end of discussing the Tucantorites, I did call for a close of the Great Council with the admonition that all the delegates return unto their own cities and settlements and meet in their own councils to ascertain the will of the people. 
87 And within two months, word returned unto Elak Kowa from all the cities and settlements, and behold, the people did concur with the decision of the Great Council. Furthermore, the people of not a few cities did send me word by personal epistle of their approbation of the manner in which the council did conduct itself. 
88 But Micah did return again unto the people of Mentina and he did represent accurately all that had transpired at the council and behold, the people were divided in their response. The one half of them approved of the decisions of the Great Council and the other half denied the authority of the council to decide in anything. 
89 And the contention over doctrine did become hot in the city of Mentina, insofar that many of the people did begin to leave the city. Some set out to create new settlements and others moved to cities and settlements wherein their families dwelt. And that portion of the population Mentina who did not follow the teaching of Tucantor became the fewer than those who did. And behold, Micah was among those who took their families out of the conflict. 
90 For the Tucantorites were dogmatic in their insistence that all people believe as they did. Tucantor, their high priest, became as a king unto them. And he did dictate unto them all that they might do. And the men whom he did set up as the priests and teachers did also have the control over every aspect of the daily life of the people. And behold, the women ceased to do miracles and to be healers. 
91 Now, those who were not of the Tucantorites were required by the law to give all that they produced unto the high priest. And Tucantor did divide all between himself and the priests and teachers, returning only a portion again. Behold, this they called consecration and it became a law in the city. Wherefore, all those who did not render all their goods unto the high priest were punished and persecuted. 
92 And behold, unto those who believed on his doctrine, Tucantor returned a greater portion than he did unto those who did not. And, because the people were made to render all their goods and whatsoever they did produce unto the high priest, behold, there was never any surplus. Wherefore, when the practice of Tucantor did create beggars of those that believed not his doctrine, the people ceased to feel responsible for them and they did nothing for them. Therefore, they were forced to leave the city with scarcely even the clothing on their backs. 
93 And I did send an epistle unto Tucantor, who had become high priest in Mentina just as he had prophesied. And I entreated him on behalf of those of the citizens of Mentina who differed from him in their beliefs. Yea, I did send him an epistle, saying: 
94 Tucantor, high priest of Mentina, I am Shioni Akek, high priest of Elak Kowa. I do send you greetings from the Nem. And behold, I do inquire of you after the safety and well being of the Nem of your city. For I have heard report of many that the Nem do suffer greatly for want in Mentina. 
95 Behold, I would entreat you, that if the Nem are no longer welcome in Mentina, to the effect that they are persecuted and punished for their beliefs, do allow them to bring their belongings even up into Elak Kowa, that we might care for our own in the manner of our tradition. 
96 But do cease to persecute our relations in your city. For this is not the way of the Lord, nor of His righteousness. And if you do purport to be His prophet, I would exhort you, for the good of all your people, that you set not this example for them. Behold, the Lord shall not hold you harmless in this evil. 
97 And behold, Tucantor was wroth with me because of the epistle and he did answer me, saying: 
98 Behold, Shioni Akek, I am the high priest of all the land and my people are the Nem. Yea, there are none in the land who may call themselves after this name save they be believers in the doctrine which the Lord has revealed unto me. Do not, therefore, write unto me as if you do speak the mind of the Nem. For you are a non-believer and have no authority. And also you have taken the honor of high priest unto yourself, being not called of God by His own oracle, as was Aaron. 
99 As for those in my city who are unbelievers, do not concern yourself with them. Behold, they keep not the statutes and commandments of God and, therefore, they have no place or station in Mentina. We may treat them as we will, for they are not to be considered citizens. Behold, they shall either conform to the doctrine or they shall leave the city. 
100 And whether any of their belongings shall be forfeit, that I alone shall decide. For behold, God has placed the city in my hands to do with as He shall dictate. Do not think to dictate to me what I ought to do and believe not that you have any wisdom that you might teach me concerning the ways of God. Behold, I am his prophet and mouthpiece. Those who go against me also go against God. 
101 And behold, this was the manner of his epistle unto me. Wherefore, I did worry for the people of Mentina, but most of all I did worry for the Nem left in the city. For behold, I knew that they did suffer greatly for lack of the necessities of life, and there were still many little children among them. 
102 Wherefore, I did send another epistle unto Tucantor, saying: 
103 Tucantor of Mentina, I am Shioni Akek, high priest of Elak Kowa and I greet you for all Nem. Listen to the words of my entreaty. For, are we not neighbors and shall we not treat one with another as brothers? Wherefore, take no offense at my offering, for it is given with good intention. 
104 Behold, the families of those that remain in Mentina who are not of your belief do cry out for the safety of their loved ones. I beseech you to allow them to gather their goods and leave the city. Behold, we shall succor them, wherefore, let them take up the bundle and depart out of your midst and persecute them not. 
105 And behold, he did send a messenger to answer me and these are the words of the messenger: 
106 Do not treat with me as a neighbor and brother, Shioni Akek, for we are neither. 
107 Now, he did address me in this manner because of his belief that the women of the Nem were become proud and that they had subjected the men under their yoke to be commanded in all things by them. And this manner of address was intended to insult me, but behold, I took no offense. And the messenger continued, saying: 
108 I know what is the desire of your heart. Behold, you do not esteem the persons you would steal from Mentina nearly so dear as you do esteem their goods and possessions. Wherefore, cease to incite the people to abandon their home, for they are Nem of Mentina, not of Elak Kowa. Behold, I shall consider any such incitement as hostilities against us and we shall defend ourselves from such hostilities. 
109 And from that point Tucantor allowed no one to leave Mentina, but kept all the people captive. Now, this suited the majority, for the more part of the people were become Tucantorites and they were content. But those who believed not in the absolute power of the high priest were deprived of their liberty and they were forced into labor for the Tucantorites. 


CHAPTER 5 
1 And it did not take much time for the news of the outrage of Mentina to reach the ears of the families and friends of those whom Tucantor had imprisoned there. And they were wroth with the people of Mentina and with the high priest in particular, insomuch that they did gather in the cities and settlements closest unto Mentina. 
2 And a particularly large body of people did gather at Elak Kowa. And the people did call for the Great Council to take up the matter of the immediate relief of the Nem of Mentina. And it was the decision of the Council that I should write an epistle one last time unto Tucantor and request that he release the Nem from the city, that they might gather with their own people in other places. 
3 And behold, I did write an epistle unto Tucantor, even according to the will of the people, saying: 
4 Behold, Tucantor, I write unto you from the city of Elak Kowa for and in behalf of all the Nem of the mountains. And I do request that you let the Nem come out of the city of Mentina. Yea, let them come out from Mentina and join their families in other places. 
5 For, it is clear that you do not esteem them as you ought. Yea, because that they are of other beliefs and customs than you, they are made slaves in their own city, even the city which they have built up with their own hands. Therefore, release them that they may take their beliefs into another place. 
6 It is not good that you should shut them up and keep them in bondage. Behold, do you not know that a great multitude has gathered here in the valley of Meninta because of your determination to hold the Nem hostage in their own home? And do you not fear that this steadfastness in your wickedness shall bring upon your city the wrath of all the people? Come, Tucantor, put aside your pride and let the people come out. 
7 Behold, I am commissioned by the people to tell you that if you do not open up the city and allow the Nem to depart from out of it in peace, verily, the people shall descend upon you and take them out by force. And never before has such a thing been in all the history of this land since the days of Father Hagoth. Do you wish to be known in all the land as one who brings down the peace and sows the seeds of death and destruction? Yea, the first of your race to do such things, you shall leave an inheritance unto your children that will win them the onus of all the world. 
8 Wherefore, cousin and brother, seek reason! Open up the gates of the city and let the people go! 
9 And behold, Tucantor answered him, saying: 
10 Behold, we know that we are righteous and the Lord has chosen us because we do steadfastly adhere unto His word and His commandment. And we do also know that you have stirred the people up against Mentina because of your wickedness. For you are of the ways and wickedness of the Nehors, teaching to all people that they may decide for the Lord what is right and what is wrong. Behold, you shall not prosper in this wickedness and must repent. 
11 For you do teach that all people may discern the mind and will of God and we know this to be false. For, He has always called up prophets to serve Him and to be His mouthpiece upon the earth. But you teach that all people may approach His holy throne and impose upon Him in all things. Behold, you must repent of this evil. 
12 And we also know that you do teach the people that they may form councils and act in the name of God. To act in His holy name requires His authority. Do you not know that He does not give this authority except by the word of His mouth unto His servant the prophet? Behold, you call up your priests and your prophets by the word of the people. Wherefore, how can you declare yourself high priest? You are nothing but a puppet of the people. 
13 And again, your councils are called up by women. This is an abomination before God. Do you not read the scriptures? Do you not recall that Adam is the head of Eve? Wherefore then, do your women act as the head of the body? 
14 But, we do acknowledge that you have greater strength in your wickedness than we have in our righteousness. Wherefore, we will release the wicked into your hands. Do with them as you will but do not expect good to come of them. For they are full of sloth and are unprofitable. They are the most idle of the people, wherefore, take them and do with them as you will. 
15 But behold, they shall not take out of the city any possession. For we are the chosen of the Lord and have all things in common. Wherefore, how can they take from the city ought that does not belong to them? Let not anyone think that these idlers may rob from the industrious because that they will not hearken unto the Lord and unto His prophet. 
16 And this was the language with which Tucantor did abuse Shioni in his epistle. But behold, Shioni did not allow his wrath to be kindled against Tucantor, but he did rejoice that the people of Mentina were to be allowed to come out of the city without that the people of Meninta should have to rise up with force of arms to take them out. 
17 Behold, it was not the desire of Shioni that all people should agree with him or with the majority. Rather, he only wanted the freedom of the people to move away from that which did enslave them. Wherefore, he did rejoice that he had obtained the freedom of the people. 
18 Now, when the people of Mentina who were prisoners there were allowed to come out of the city, they were miserable indeed. For Tucantor had ordered that they be flogged and stripped of their clothing before they were allowed to depart. And they presented a scene of woe and despair as they proceeded through the deriding shouts of the people in their naked and miserable state. And the wicked people of the city, who had once been their brethren, did cast stones at them as they passed, and many were injured. 
19 And the people who had gathered in to succor them took blankets and covered them as they passed out of the gates of the city. And they gave them wine to drink and food to eat. For behold, many had not eaten in many days and some were dying for want of food or drink. 
20 And the angry wrath of the people was kindled against Mentina because of the miserable state of the refugees. But Shioni did calm them and they brought the sufferers down unto Elak Kowa to nurture and to comfort them. 
21 And the priests of Elak Kowa did go straightway even unto the archives in the mountains and they did gather together all the records of the people quickly, lest Tucantor take possession of them too. And they did leave copies in the archives, but they did also take out all the histories of the people since Hagoth came out of the Land Southward, that they might not be lost to the people because of the wickedness of the high priest and the people of the city of Mentina. 
22 And the mothers of Elak Kowa called upon me to convene a Great Council again to discuss what must be done. And I did call for a Great Council and delegates from out of all the peoples who called themselves Nem came to the Council. 
23 And when the delegates from every city were gathered, I did call for a count of the delegates. And these are cities that sent delegates unto the Great Council at Elak Kowa: 
24 Phaynith-Im and Phenith of the new settlement of Phenith Ee-It; Midgan-Idi and Da-In of Elak Kowa; Kamiakim and Toniah Lotnah of Potal; Nohonaya and Pa Sineth of the city of Elgiah; Parah and Nomiah-Min, of the city of Pagwit, which is also called Michim-Mic; Monoriah and Mineat of Hagoth; Pingwit and Kayith of Sevim; Pa Wayat and Panah-Nin of the women’s refuge of Korinah; Ealekoet Akek and Kochets Kunnin of Nespelem; Peliah and Beleuh of the Pahshi settlement of Porinor; Tlin Gee-it and Tso-Tsit of the city of Tliningsah and of Haydats; Rhen and Kaboret of the city of Witchittim and Kodahah; Megnem and Pa-In-Nah Waylit of Corianton and Winebag. 
25 And there were many cities of the Nem represented, but these were the delegates that were chosen to hear the matter. 
26 And the Great Council of Elak Kowa determined that the city of Mentina had committed a great evil upon its own people, insofar that the Council recommended to all the Nem that Mentina be no more considered part of the Nem of the Mountains or of the Plains and the Lakes. Yea, the Council recommended that there should be no more trade of the surplus of the Nem to the city of Mentina and its inhabitants. And they did also recommend that the old city be no longer recommended to the sojourner or the traveling sage, for it had become perilous to anyone who believed not the doctrine of Tucantor. 
27 And when word went out from the Council and the Common Consent of the people was sought, behold, the voice of the people did rise up in condemnation of the people of Mentina. And the recommendation of the Great Council held, and Mentina was cut off. And when this was published throughout all the land, many families did come out of Mentina secretly and did also join with their people in other cities. 
28 And Mentina did at once become an impoverished place. For, without the surplus of the Nem, who was left to support the priests and the teachers? Yea without the support of the surplus, Tucantor had not great riches at his disposal and all the people were made poor. And they had not all things in common and they did contend with one another to find trade and to sell their wares and their produce. For the Nem did no longer find use for their goods and avoided the city altogether. 
29 And the Council of Elak Kowa did also meet to discuss the outcome of the Great Council. For Elak Kowa was only a day’s ride from Mentina and it was very close to the place where Tucantor had begun the division of the Nem of Mentina. And the Council decided to make preparations for all of the inhabitants who wished to follow them to depart out of the valley of Meninta and go even up to Nespelem. 
30 And the people did also give their Common Consent to this plan and great preparations were made ready. It was determined that, when the snow melted and the ice passed from off of the rivers in the following spring, the people of Elak Kowa would be no more and they would take of all their goods, and their houses, and their animals, and all manner of things with which they did administer their stewardships, even up into the north country. Yea, and it was the plan of the people to make a new settlement near unto Nespelem and Potal. 
31 For behold, the people of Elak Kowa would not live in the same place as a city of people who would do wickedness such as the Tucantorites had done unto the people of Mentina. Nay, they would not have such people as their neighbors. Wherefore, they made great preparations to leave the valley. 
32 And it was to the great surprise of the people of Elak Kowa that their council did receive an epistle from Tucantor and from the priests and teachers of Mentina. And in this epistle the people of Mentina did beg the people of Elak Kowa to remain in the valley and continue to be their neighbors and allies. But the Nem have always avoided the Gadianton Robbers and they have always shunned them and worked to shelter their people from them. And if this was the way of the people concerning the Gadianton Robbers, who conspired daily to overthrow all that is good, how then could they do otherwise with the Tucantorites, who had conspired to take away the liberty of the land and of the people? 
33 And in the space of the remainder of the summer, and with the passing of winter the people, having made all manner of preparations, took up their burdens and removed out of the valley of their forefathers, just as Nephi of old took his people out of the place of their first inheritance in the Land Southward because his brethren did conspire to destroy the people. 
34 And the whole of the north of the valley of Meninta, as well as half the habitations in the south of the valley were made desolate at once. And houses were left empty and became the habitation of vermin. And farms were left unworked and unplanted. And shops were left unattended and warehouses were left barren. 
35 And the people of Mentina were disrupted in all that they did. For, of a necessity they were forced to take up much more work than that to which they were accustomed. And this was a sore trial for them, for the Tucantorites had become enamored with the idleness that the new doctrine allowed them. But Tucantor, seeing the ruin of his city, ordered them to take up once again the plow and the hammer. 
36 For, with three quarters of the production necessary to feed the populace of Mentina and to support them in the manner which they had chosen gone out of the land, it became expedient for Tucantor to press the remaining people into labor. 
37 And even the priests, who had tasted of the leisure of their callings, were made to take up all manner of work with their hands. And the priests were brought low again because of the impending hunger that they knew would fall upon the city because of the lack of production and of trade. Surely, in but one season Mentina was reduced to the poorest and hungriest of the cities of the Land Northward. 
38 And the people of Mentina complained bitterly against their high priest. Yea, they were wroth with him because of the disaster he had brought upon them. And they did hold him responsible for all of their woes. For they had thought to become rich with the surplus of all the cities, and this because of the many things he had promised them. But now they were the poorest and most wretched of people in all the land. 
39 For, whereas in the year before the ascension of Tucantor to the seat of high priest, the city of Mentina might have been called the richest and best supplied city of all the Nem, yet in one year it had been reduced to the poorest. 
40 And Tucantor discovered that it was difficult to press his people into service one for another after that they had made prisoners and slaves of their neighbors. Yea, he found his flock troublesome to shepherd when the Nem had gone from out of the land. 
41 And the people that had once loved that their neighbors had once provided for them did quickly become idlers. Wherefore, it was doubly difficult for them to take up a greater portion of work than they had been accustomed to do even before they had sustained Tucantor in his wickedness. Yea, they were sore pressed to do even enough to survive, let alone to provide any surplus at all. 
42 And behold, the greater portion of the valley lay desolate and empty. And the fields went fallow and were not planted. And the streets were not filled with people plying their trades. And the warehouses were not filled even enough for the people who remained to pass through the winter without want. 
43 And thus, a beautiful age of peace and prosperity ended for the valley of Meninta and all its inhabitants. Yea, the people began to flee in haste and in secret, for they feared that another winter in Mentina might devour them. And the city of Mentina was reduced to scarcely two hundred souls. 


CHAPTER 6 
1 Now, Tucantor’s religion did not spread quickly from its beginning in Mentina. And this is in part because of the removal of the more part of the people out of the valley of Meninta, and also in part because the people of the Land Northward have ever been concerned with that manner of living whereby the individual may come out of Babylon and see the face of Christ. Tucantor did continue to teach the people that they could not do this but by the power of his priesthood and this did deter many from any interest in the system. 
2 But the doctrine did find interest in the cities down by the gulf of the sea in the south. In those places where there was still some remnant of the people who were left in the land after the great Nephite war with the Lamanites, many people saw in it a way to bring their neighbor into subjection and the doctrine grew in the south. 
3 And before many years had passed, the city of Hagoth was overtaken by the Tucantorites. And Tucantor, himself, did remove to the city of Hagoth and he did rule that city as he had Mentina. But behold, not all the people could be controlled by this new doctrine and there was strife between those that believed the new thing and those that believed it not. 
4 And Tucantor sent armed men out to battle against those that believed not and his enemies prevailed for a season. They did beat the Tucantorites in battle and took captive their priests and even their high priest himself. But they did not wish the destruction of the newcomers. For Hagoth had stood nearly empty for some time and the people who had gone back into that country to inhabit the old cities there desired that their population might grow somewhat. 
5 Wherefore, they did make a treaty with the Tucantorites that they might live together peacefully. And in this treaty they arranged that the Tucantorites might occupy the sacred places and have the ordering of them for half the year and in the other half of the year the ordering of the sacred places and of the surplus, was left to the original inhabitants. And upon this peace they did all agree, and the priests were released. 
6 But Tucantor was old and did not return to rule over his people. For he was taken roughly from his bed when his opponents overcame his armies and he was carried off into a secret place in the wilderness. And this was done in order that the Tucantorites could be held to their covenant. But behold, Tucantor died of a sudden in the secret place and his people did mourn his death. 
7 And in the city of Hagoth, and in the settlements round about, they have two religions and two councils and two bodies of priesthood in every place. And they build up their high places and they have all things in a duality. And it is a wonder that such a system holds together at all. But they do prosper after their own fashion and who are we to judge them. Behold, if they have found a way to live peaceably then they have done a good thing. 
8 It was in this way that the doctrine of Tucantor was preserved in the land, and his followers also. For, they could not have prevailed long in Mentina. It is true, they had the run of the valley. But they could not sustain anything more than a camp there without the help of its neighbors. Wherefore, Tucantor built up a city and a doctrine and it carried on in his name in the city of Hagoth. 
9 And by treaty with their neighbors, and a kind of Common Consent, the Tucantorites continued in the land and built up their population. For, without the help and cooperation of a goodly number of people, the priests could not have lived as they wished and held up the standard which Tucantor had given them. Without someone to do their work for them and to provide for them, they could not have survived for long without modifying their purpose. This they did achieve by agreement with the people of Hagoth. 
10 But they did not enjoy any season of peace. For, the people who had taken to living in the old cities of Hagoth were remnants of that Great War that ravished the whole land in the time of my father. Yea, they were Lamanites and Gadianton Robbers who had not returned unto the Land Southward. And although they had lost the lust for constant bloodshed, yet were they a jealous and deceitful people. And one settlement made war on another and each city held its own law. And they had the constant necessity of defending themselves and their provender from their neighbors. 
11 And the people were quarrelsome and dangerous. Yea, and they were difficult to control. But, because the Tucantorites had adopted the need to control their fellow man, this became to them their motivation. They worked to control the hearts of all the people of that region and this did constrain them from much preaching in other places. And their doctrine remained in but one place. 
12 But behold, because they had left the valley of Meninta, some of the Nem did return again and begin to build up the settlements again and to have the keeping and the care of the archives there. And Mentina was once again numbered among the Nem because of the removal of the Tucantorites. 
13 And the Nem did rejoice that the place of their father’s choosing was once again held by the pure in heart. But, I must tell you, Mentina was never again a principal city of the Nem of the mountains and the records were copied and carried away into the north countries, notwithstanding the libraries did remain ever hidden in their safe places in Meninta. 
CHAPTER 7 
1 Now, it has been seven years since the Tucantorites removed from Mentina down even unto the city of Hagoth and the valley of Meninta has recovered somewhat from the division that Tucantor caused. And Elak Kowa has been resettled by my brother and his family. But behold, it is as if the valley does remember the great hurt done there upon the peace that once dwelt in it. Yea, some say the valley mourns. 
2 And Nespelem has become the capital city of the Nem of the Mountains. And behold, when I did relocate my people even up into the mountainous places surrounding the great canyon of Wallohitwah, the people of the city did welcome us and beg us to come down unto it to dwell. But there were too many of us. Wherefore, we did divide into five hosts and we did choose new places to settle. 
3 But I did take my family and go down into Nespelem and my wife’s people did take us into their own houses for a season. And they did also assist us in building our own houses and we did take up our stewardship among them. 
4 And when the winter had come, we were once again warm in houses of our own. Yea, we were safe from the wind and the blast of the mountain snows because of the goodness and the charity of the Nem. And they did even more than this. For, before the winter was over, the people of Nespelem did entreat me to be their high priest and I did accept the honor. 
5 Now, look at us and declare to me how that we are so different from the Tucantorites. Did they not also leave the contested place and go away into another city? And were they not also welcomed in by the people after a fashion? And was their peculiar doctrine not also preserved in the land? Wherefore, are we not alike, our two peoples? 
6 But behold, they did go with war in their hands and wickedness in their hearts. Behold, they were beaten by their adversaries and were made to agree to live in peace by extortion. We did not go with war in our hands and wickedness in our hearts. We were taken in by the people with fullness of charity. We had no need to lift up the sword in defense of our way of living and no need to defend ourselves at all. We feared not for our survival in the new place and had no need of compromise. Wherefore, I discern that we are different indeed from our brethren the Tucantorites. Surely, theirs shall always be a life of war and turmoil, where ours will ever be one of peace and prosperity. 
7 And, though our circumstances be on the surface similar, yea, though we both became a migratory people, cast out from our own place and in search of a new place wherein we might dwell and prosper, yet how different are we in principle and in consequence. 
8 For we feared not at all that we would not survive as a people. Yea, we knew the disposition of the people in the land whereunto we removed ourselves. And before the snows flew and covered the ground, we dwelt in homes of our own and our granaries were filled. 
9 And in Nespelem we found family and clan. We found our own people and they welcomed us in. This is Nem and the way of the Nem. Dare I boast of such blessings? Yet shall I, for I discern that many who do read our history might wish for such things in their own lives. Yea, I shall make so bold as to suggest that we were blessed indeed. 
10 And when we were settled, our high priests and Peli did gather all the people together that lived in the region round about Nespelem. Yea, and though the snow lay on the ground, we did all dance a dance together to give thanks for the snows and to retain in our hearts a communion with our ancestors. For behold, we now lived in a place that depended upon the moisture in the winter to sustain it in the summer. And we did dance upon the ground, yea, even upon our knees. And we did sing to the sacred directions. And we did cast ourselves upon the Earth and ask a blessing upon her and upon all living things. 
11 This new thing did we to commemorate all that we had learned and all that we had sacrificed in order that we might peacefully retain the ways and customs and blessings of the Nem. This we did as a token of our thanksgiving unto the Lord for all that we had received from Him and in all that He had prospered us. 
12 And while we were thus employed, my wife’s grandmother, even the most ancient one, was overcome by the Spirit and she did break forth in a song. And the Holy Ghost whispered to me that this song would also come into the minds of our descendents in a distant time as they also began again to give thanks for all that their ancestors had done for them. And when Grandmother Akek finished with her singing, we did all learn the words of the song, and we did dedicate it to our children, and our children’s children. And these are the words of the song: 
Tay-ahk Nu-unim, 
Hay-eetay-weet-kaynim Kay Pah-aynin Wee-seet-tsay, Nu-unim Way-eet-tays. 
It is with thanksgiving we come into this our place today. 
Kay-kohne-em Nu-unim, Tee-teelu-layct Heepay-waykt-ee-ee-yay 
Teemkt-nee-eenekt. 
It was the stewardship of our thankful ancestors. 
Kohnah Kee-yay, 
Nahmah-ahtalah-pusah-kekt Pah-aynin Wee-see-eets Keen-ee-eepekt. 
We come to this place with thanksgiving. 
Hee-eetay-wee-say Kee-yay Nu-unim, Yay-lee-ay-layin. 
It is sacred and of value to us, our work. 
Kay-heet-eeyay-sowks Nu-unim Chee-eekeen Ku-chee-stee-tay 
Way-chay-nep-tay-ayin. 
That which echoes in our words and in our songs… 
Chu-yayp-ku-chay Way-chee-eetay Cheem-ee-eem 
Hee-eemtay-chekt-toksayn-ay Keen-yay Yay-lay-yay nay. 
Naturally, we have them, for they are in this work also. 
Ku-us Kee-eechee-eetay 
Tee-toh-ohkahn-cha-ahweet. 
Thus, it is indeed the way of the People. 
Kohnah Pee-ee-kayps-snahweet Nu-unim Chee-nay-chee-hee-nayseeks… 
They are the strength that we take into ourselves. 
Ku-us Kay-lah Chahm 
Chee-see-ee-lay-ept Wee-eetays. 
As all of you who sleep in the Earth have done this. 
Chee-nee-eek-chu-kay Neeyee-sayp Tah-lay-pu-usah. 
Even they who worship differently do the same. 
Kay-tu Kah-ah Yohks Kee-ee 
Helah-wah-teem-sah. 
It is a Sacred Talk. 


CHAPTER 8 
1 And we did begin again, even as our father Hagoth began again, except that the land was filled with Nem and we were not a lonely people. And our city did grow and we called it Elak Kowa, in commemoration of the place from which we had come. 
2 And Mentina, which means “Place of Salt” was emptied almost entirely of people. Yea, seldom did many people ever live again in the valley during all the days of my life and my stewardship. But the Nem kept a small settlement there near unto the Archives to guard them and to keep them. And my brother made an attempt to reestablish Elak Kowa, but he did not succeed in his desire. Yea, he did return ere long to Elak Kowa and we did welcome him in again. 
3 But, in my day, the valley of Meninta was an empty and lonesome place. Yea, the meadows and fields returned unto expanses of willows and breaks, and they were filled with wild animals. 
4 And the water filled up the cisterns and overflowed. And the tanks were broken and the catchments thrown down. Yea, all the water rushed headlong down the streams and into the lake. And none of it watered the fields. Wherefore, the vineyards and the orchards did dry up. 
5 And the houses made of wood did wither and crack, for there was no one there to oil them. And the thatch of the roofs did blow in the wind, for there was no one there to mend them. And the shutters did fly from off the windows, for there was no one there to see to them in the storm. 
6 And the streets, which had been well beaten and sealed with fish meal and oil, dried and cracked. Yea, the wind did blow upon the streets and the sun did beat upon them and they became dust and melted away. And the trees that lined them and the gardens that adorned them withered and died. 
7 And the High Place stood out on the hill, alone of all, the only thing cared for in any way in the city. And, I am told, it also begins to fade away because of disuse and the lack of attention. 
8 Yea, only the sun and the wind frequent the High Place in Mentina. And it is a lonesome place. Its tree lined streets are no more, for the trees have all died. Its beautiful gardens are withered and gone. There are only dusty ruins of foundations on the hill and the lake, being filled up with the floods, has claimed all the houses below. 
9 Yea, and because it is the custom of the people to build with wood almost entirely, the sun and the wind have dried them up and they are speedily taken with fire in the season of thunder. And the lake has swallowed up and consumed all others. Yea, though the tall buildings are still visible above the waters, how can they stand when their foundations and first walls are flooded? 
10 For the water that sustained Mentina was carefully managed. Yea, it flowed down out of the mountains every year and the people did catch this water carefully and use it, wisely directing its flow so that all the land could be watered as a garden. But, when the people are all gone the system did not function, in but one season it was destroyed and the water found its own way again. And the garden withered and blew away. Yea, Mentina is become a waste place. 
11 And the orchards and vineyards have all dried up and give no more fruit because there is no water brought unto them. And the garden place that was Meninta is returned to a state fit only to be an outpost of the Nem. 
12 But the Nem do continue to prosper in the North Country and over toward the West Sea. And also in the plains the Nem do continue to gain and prosper. And in the land of Corianton, away to the North in the Lake Country, the Nem still have all things in common, for they are of one heart and one spirit. Notwithstanding, they do continue to recede into the forests, for there are Gadianton Robbers again in the land. 
13 But they do continue to send delegates up to Elak Kowa to the Great Councils when they are deemed necessary, and we do continue in trade and in communion with them from time to time. 
14 And we do also receive from time to time emissaries from the Nem of the Islands. Yea, they do also send us ambassadors, for they desire not that we should become a sundered people. They know of our doing and we are kept appraised of theirs, insofar that we do feel as thought there were no great ocean between us. They are our kin and kindred and we do keep our association with them. 
15 And we do receive, though less frequently than in times past, envoys from the countries that lie far to the west across the sea, even toward Jerusalem of old. But, it is as I say, their visits are much fewer now than in times past and the news which they bring to us is not at all good. 
16 For, it seems that many people do follow strange traditions that do not edify. And yet others seek only to enslave their fellow men. This news does fill us with sorrow for the people of the world. We do pray for all people and hope for them that they may also live as we do, but it does appear to be a difficult thing to do. But we, the Nem, do it. I may be arrogant in my assumption, for I certainly have not traveled in all the world. But, from the reports that come to us from other lands, the Nem do live a different law and we think a better law than the world chooses to live. 
17 And this way that we live is so important to us that we will not suffer ourselves to remain in the company of they who seek to take away our peace. It was for this cause that we left our homes in the Land Southward when our forefathers saw in visions the coming ruin of the Nephites. And it was also for this reason that I did take my own people out of the place of our home and brought them up into the land of Nespelem and of Potal. For we would not that our children might come into the wickedness of Tucantor. 
18 For, what does it profit us to remain in the midst of neighbors who will enslave their own people? Shall we always be strong enough to overcome them? Or might we some day have been enslaved by them also? But this is the thing that I would not conscience for my children. And I did make my plans to remove myself from out of Meninta. And behold, when I had made my own plans, all the people were of like mind and they did follow me into the mountainous north country. 
19 For the Tucantorites were not so much unlike the Gadianton Robbers to us. And we knew that we could not reason with them. But, could we take up the sword and slay them as our forefathers did? I say unto you, Nay. For the Lord our God did not command it as He did with them. 
20 Therefore, since we could not teach them, and the Lord had set Himself against slaying them, we did decide that it was better to leave the land and get ourselves out of Meninta completely. 
21 And it is a good thing that we did. For when wickedness is taken up in the hearts of men, it is hardly cleansed out of them when there are many who have taken it up and made it a standard unto themselves. Yea, when it has taken over the governance of a city, it can hardly be cleansed except that the Lord does make such a cleansing. But what men might do it? Surely not we, who love peace. 
22 For it is much better that we go to a place of peace, where our hearts may be at peace, than to remain in a place of conflict. Yea, for fear will have attracted to us they who are filled with fear. And anger will have attracted to us they who are filled with wrath. And could we have escaped the necessity of war had we remained in Meninta? That I cannot say. I hope that we might have. But the memory of the awful wickedness and the persecution wrought upon our relations, who had for a time been enslaved by the Tucantorites, did harrow us up in the remembrance of all that my father did teach us about the Great War between the Nephites and the Lamanites. 
23 And there was none among the Nephites who were not harrowed up in the souls with wrath and fear. And they were ruled by wrath, for they went from the shedding of blood to the shedding of blood. And behold, every man and every woman did sleep upon their swords. And they did lay themselves down upon the ground at night and await the coming of the dawn in anticipation of the next day’s atrocities. And behold, were not the Nephites brothers to the Lamanites even as the Tucantorites were our brothers? 
24 And I do deem that it was better that we did make our departure out of the land, rather than remain and eventually become overrun in all our settlements and cities with Tucantorites and the doctrine of Tucantor. 
25 For to stay would have brought war. Yea, to stay would have brought war between brothers. For they would not be taught and they were determined to rule over the people. Wherefore, there must have been great war ere long if we had stayed in the valley. For, they did covet the product of the valley and the fruits of the labors of all men. And we did deem it better to take it all away into another place. 
26 But this is not all. We did also depart out of our homeland because it was clear to us that the people of Mentina would surely have enslaved us even as they had enslaved their own brethren and neighbors. And, valuing our freedoms, we did take our journey and came up out of Meninta, leaving the Tucantorites to support themselves as best they might without the production of their neighbors, and without any trade. 
27 And before much time had passed, the Tucantorites were forced to leave the valley of Meninta as well. They did also depart out of the valley and leave it a wasteland. 
28 And thereafter, the city of Mentina was never again known as a great city of the Nem, but the libraries were maintained and the people still travel there to study in peace. It has become a solitary place, a place of stillness. Yea, I may say that there is still a good purpose in Mentina, but it is not the same as it once had been. It is a memorial and a reminder of what shall become of all the Nem if they sin against those precious things which God does give us because of our determination to serve Him and our neighbor. 
29 For there is little conflict there now. The Tucantorites have all left it and gone into the East and into the South countries. Yea, the struggle is gone out of the land and it is a solitary place. 
30 And we live in peace and tranquility in the mountains because that we did choose a better way. We did choose to depart out of the conflict and out of the threat of war. For, we could have remained and fought for our way of life, but none of us desired to engage in the needless work of death that war with the Tucantorites would have become. And the cities and settlements of Meninta were so connected that any breach would have eventuated much hardship on all. Wherefore, a breach must surely have come, and war hard on its straps. 
31 And the Nem are a peaceable people and we teach the peaceable things of the kingdom. Wherefore, we did choose to take the course of Nephi of old and remove ourselves from out of the conflict. Yea, even as Nephi did gather his people and remove out of the land into another place, so too did we remove ourselves from the conflict even before it could grow into war. 
32 This is the resolution that we chose, and by the Common Consent of the people we did chose it. Yea, with one heart and one voice we did pack up all that we had and we did remove ourselves from out of the land. And we deemed this the best course to take. For, though each of us was harrowed up in our hearts, yea, our souls were kindled with thoughts of anger and fear because of that which the Tucantorites had done unto their own relations, yet we did not wish to build our foundation upon war. We did not wish our lives and our nation to become founded on the shedding of blood and the rendering of evil unto every evil. 
33 For we had often heard my father speak, and also we did hear the words of those who also escaped the utter destruction of the Nephites, concerning the awful state of mind which did overcome the participants in that Great War which snuffed out an entire nation. Yea, there was not one person who did not sleep upon the sword and awful were the end of those days. And even the youths did learn the work of death and to live by the oaths of their mouths. 
34 And in leaving our homeland we do chose a path that is better for us. For we are a peaceable people, a people of healing, and there was none of us who wished to become a people of war. Surely, had we stayed and had we made an attempt to bend the Tucantorites to our law and to our way, we shall have corrupted even the good of it with fear and with anger. Shall our way have escaped some change in its character because of such proximity to the object of that fear and that anger? Or are we so different from all other people that we might believe ourselves immune to that which the thoughts of our own minds and the feelings of our own hearts must have surely brought upon us? 
35 Yea, of a surety had we taken up the fear and the anger and given place for them in our hearts, shall we not have become defined by that fear and that anger? Is it possible that we, who are built upon a foundation of healing, could have escaped the change in our hearts that must result when a doctrine of fear is taken up? Nay, we would have become that which we most feared. We would have set a standard wholly unlike that which our forefathers gave us and the Nem would have been no more. Yea, just as surely as the Nephites did destroy themselves as a nation, so shall the Nem of the Mountains have been destroyed, and just as completely. 
36 And the Lord did not guide us but to depart out of the land. For He knows the end from the beginning and the result of our staying was plain before Him. Wherefore, we could have been confident in remaining in the Meninta had He commanded it. But behold, I say unto you, He made no such revelation to us, neither singly or as a body. Wherefore, since it was not His will that we stay and rid the land of the Tucantorites, we deemed it wise to depart out of it. 
37 Yea, in order that we might always act and live in accordance with the word and will of God, I did determine to remove my family and all who would follow me out of the land and go up into the north country to dwell with our relations there. And behold, all the people, save the Tucantorites, did choose to go with me also. And I felt as my father and my grandfather must have felt leading a great body of people. Yea, the people made me their captain and I did lead them out of bondage and out of slavery. 


CHAPTER 9 
1 The nation which is known as Nem of the Mountains is united with the nation which is known as the Nem of the Plains, as also it is united with the nation which is known as the Nem of the Lakes. And we do begin to be sundered somewhat in the languages which we speak. Nevertheless, an ingenious method of communication has been devised whereby those of us who do travel much between the three great nations might speak to one another without discord. 
2 For, many of our words are similar, but the manner in which we use them has changed and become sundered. The common tongue of the people is not the same as the written language and the way in which we speak has diverged and gone in different directions. And, because our writing is reserved for the keeping of our records only, it is not useful for us in daily discourse, a manner of speaking with our hands has been devised. This, as a companion to our spoken tongues, allows us to communicate with our relations without discord. 
3 So efficient, in fact, is this method of communication, and so precise, that many of our traders use it exclusively. And it is a very curious thing to speak to one of them after that they have returned from a year’s trading with our neighbors, for they do not give up their custom quickly. Yea, they do continue to speak with their hands and barely a few words to escape their mouths until they have been home among us for some time. 
4 And these are the borders of the Nem of the Mountains: From the place where the ice allows one to cross over the West Sea even extending down the coast even to the gulf of the sea where Hagoth put in and built a settlement before continuing up the River Akish, this is known as the Coasts of the Nem of the Mountains. And from there going inland to the mouths of the great canyons and continuing northward along the spine of mountains and bending back toward the sea, is also known as the Coasts. This continuing northward and venturing inland somewhat from place to place is also part of that province. 
5 Then where the River Potelim, which flows from out of the mountains down to the sea, and it is a morning’s journey, could one walk upon the waters as the Three do, to cross it at its confluence, continuing eastward through the Spine, there opens up a great basin and plains which extend far into the north and even up against the Great Mountains; this is the province known as Potal and Nespelem. And the western half of this region is known as Potal and the eastern portion is known as Nespelem. 
6 Now, the mountain range known to us as the Spine extends from the extreme north even down almost to the gulf and then continues inland to divide the northern portions of the Land Southward down the middle. The Coasts governs all the land from the West Sea to the tops of the Spine. Potal governs all the land east of the Spine extending from four days’ journey south of the River Potelim and continuing up until the wastes of the north. This land extending inland until the Winding River, which in the sign language is shown as two hands together giving a winding motion as that of the movement of a snake, does meet the Potelim and then following the basin and plain even into the far north country, is also part of that province. 
7 From the great Salten Sea which lies to the north of Meninta traveling northward and westward until one reaches the confluence of the Winding and the Potelim, and then following the shoulders of the mountains northward, this marks the borders of the province we know as Nespelem. Continuing from the Salten Sea eastward over the mountains and out onto the plains and then northward even up into the wastes of the far north, this is also part of that province. 
8 Now, the Coasts, Potal and Nespelem are the three provinces of the Nem of the Mountains, and we speak a language that has sundered somewhat from that which Hagoth spoke. Nevertheless, it is still similar unto that language in many regards. 
9 In the southern portion of the Coasts, the Nem speak a language that is not at all far sundered from that which our forefathers spoke in the Land Southward. In the northern portion of the Coasts and in Potal, the spoken language of the people is somewhat more sundered from our original tongue. 
10 Now, there are the Nem of the Islands, the same country that was formed when Hagothah traveled there and built up his settlements. Their borders are recorded in their own records and few are there among the Nem of the Mountains who travel enough in those parts to know the lay of that country. For it is a nation of islands and only they know the area of it. 
11 But the Nem of the Islands do often come to our shores and up our rivers, for they are great navigators of the sea and know the waves each by their own names. Yea, and they are accomplished in the navigation by use of the stars and the position of the sun, which is a mysterious thing to us, who navigate by the lay of the land. 
12 And even more curious is their ability to judge by the size of the swell and the direction of the wave such things as their location upon the sea, as also the weather in diverse places, even far away lands. And this is a curious science to me and one filled with wonder. 
13 Now, from four days’ journey east of the Great Mountains which divide the west from the plains, extending down into the south even until one reaches the 
borders of the People of the great gulf, and continuing all the way to the great forests, this is the Nation we know as the Nem of the Plains. And there is a great river which is known as the Misisip which divides the plains from the forests. Continuing northward from the Misisip until it turns to the west, this is the Nation we know as the Nem of the Plains. And it was once part of the Nem of Corianton but it has since become a nation of its own people. 
14 And the Nem of the Plains follow the great herds and make their living in that way. Wherefore, they make their homes from the hides of the cattle and they are easily taken down and moved. 
15 Now, from the Misisip eastward to the mountains and northward even up to the great eastern gulf which gives onto the East Sea is the nation we know as the Nem of the Lakes. 
16 These are they who have grown out of the that nation that Corianton forged among the wild people found in the land and their language is sundered from that which is spoken in Nespelem to the extent that to speak with them requires some expertise in the sign language. Notwithstanding the sundering of the languages, they do consistently send delegates to our Great Councils and we do also send our delegates unto theirs. 
17 In the south regions and along the East Sea, there are other nations and they are made up of the remnant of the Lamanites who were left in the land after the Great War. And for a time they were numbered among the Nem, but they have left the path of the Nem and have no more all things in common and they live not by the Common Consent but will have kings and rulers to govern them. These are considered neighbors but they are not Nem. Wherefore, the Nem have concourse with them and do trade with them from time to time, but the Nem do for the most part remain separated from them. 
18 Now, the people of the Land Southward do occupy all the face of the land in that region even down past the narrow neck of land and continuing down the coast of the West Sea even down to the southernmost regions. And they do make war each city upon the other. Yea, seldom have we had word of any nation which does grow to any size but that their neighbors do seek to bring them into subjection unto themselves. This is become the way and the economy of the Land Southward. 
19 Now this is the lay of the land of the Lands Northward and Southward, and of the peoples thereof. Of other lands and peoples we have heard much, and even some of our own people have traveled in diverse places in the world. But their borders and their stories must be written in other records and we are satisfied to hear of them in the stories that their pilgrims tell when they come to visit in the lands of the Nem. 


CHAPTER 10 
1 And it pleased the Nem of Nespelem to call me up to the seat of the high priest because I did lead my people out of Meninta up into the north country. And this was considered a great act of council, but I esteem it no great thing. But the people proclaimed it as a mighty work - that so great a Common Consent could be made by so large a population. And the people esteemed me greatly because of the removal of an entire people up into safety. 
2 And when the people see me in the streets of the cities and settlements of Nespelem, they do greet me and make a peculiar obeisance unto me. And this thing does give me cause for discomfort, for I do not esteem myself differently than any other father. But the people do this peculiar thing out of respect of what the people of Meninta gave in sacrifice for our way of life. 
3 But the people do not bow down in any kind of worship when they do this, for this would be sin. But they do incline the head and place a hand upon their breast whenever they do see me or pass by me in the streets and in the synagogues. 
4 And behold, this thing displeases me, for it does seem to me to set one apart from all others to do such obeisance to one’s fellowman. But the people cannot be convinced to cease the practice, notwithstanding my objections to it. Therefore, so that there might not develop a caste or castes within the Nem, I have taken up the same custom, giving the same obeisance unto all that I meet upon my path. 
5 Now, this thing has become a custom unto us, to greet every person we see with inclined head and a hand upon our breast. And when we pray, it seems to us only natural to make this obeisance unto the Lord unto whom we hope we are sealed. For, we would be His friends and His relations. And if we do this unto all our relations, then it has only become natural to do the same when we pray. 
6 For I must believe that He who has created all things and given us a stewardship here in His creation would want us to feel as much for His love as we do for the love of our relations. And it appears seemly unto me that what deference we give to the least of they who call themselves His relations, so also ought we to give unto Him who is our head. 
7 For Him do we worship, as also His Father and His Mother, by and through the peculiar instrumentality of the Holy Ghost. Yea, we make our oblations and all our prayers unto Them in His name, even the Peacemaker. Even unto Them do we bow ourselves in worship. 
8 And the people do also greet each one the other in a peculiar way, praying in the same moment that all might be well with them. And this is become a sacred thing that we do one unto another. Yea, the Nem of Nespelem have become peculiar in this custom. 
9 Yea, we do this in token that we are one people Zion. Yea, we do incline or bow the head in token that we are of one mind and have all things in common. And we do place a hand upon the breast to signify that we are one people Zion and govern ourselves by the Common Consent. 
10 And this custom does continually remind us that we have covenanted with the Lord that we will live the Law of Consecration. And it is this final law given in this mortality which is called the fullness of the gospel, for it is the culmination of our culture and our society. Behold, it is the keeping of this law that is the finishing of our faith, for by it are we made the friends of the Peacemaker. And it is the breaking of this law that undoes our salvation and causes each to return again unto their own. 
11 Wherefore, should we ever sin against this fullness of the gospel, behold, the Lord shall take from us our stewardship. Behold, this is in accordance with the blessing and the curse which He did lay upon this choice land. Shall we continue in good faith and in prosperity, then let us observe to keep this law and this statute and hallow it. For, in the day we depart from it, seeking our own good over that of our neighbor, we shall have sinned against the fullness of the gospel and the Lord shall turn His holy face from us. Cursed shall be that day. 


CHAPTER 11 
1 Now, after that we had established ourselves and built up our city, even a new Elak Kowa in the mountains, and Nespelem was greatly enlarged by the addition of all the Nem of Meninta who had gathered further north, we began to have peace in the land. And we did also once again have peace in our hearts. For, we had not the conflict of the Tucantorites to cause conflict to arise in our hearts. 
2 But, because the Tucantorites had left the valley of Meninta and the place was left desolate, my brother did once again return there. And he did build up a settlement close by to the libraries, and behold, one of his companions did build a small settlement near unto the Temple Hill. And these were very small settlements and remained so, for there were few who wished to join them in the valley. 
3 And my brother, as also the people who went down unto Meninta with him, did remain in the valley long enough to establish small settlements, which we called missions. And these missions were built with the intention, not of reestablishing the valley to its original character, but to protect and preserve the Temple and the libraries that remained there. 
4 For, although every settlement and every city now have their High Place, yet, the Temple at Mentina was the first to be built in the Land Northward after our father Hagoth made his journey. And the people continue in an especial attitude for the place. And the libraries also continue to hold an especial spirit for the people, and many make a journey now and then to sit in them and read the records. Wherefore, it seemed good that settlements to accommodate travelers ought to be established there. 
5 But my brother was not satisfied to remain long in the lonesome place and he did return after a season of service back up to Nespelem and Elak Kowa. For, he had also married into the family of Akek and his wife and children had remained behind while he sojourned in Meninta. 
6 And he did tell us stories of Meninta, that in the night strange things did take place there and strange sounds were constantly to be heard. For, it was his superstition that the land yet held a memory of the things done in Mentina by the Tucantorites, and that it still mourned the loss of the Nem. Behold, it is his gift to see the spirits of men and women who have lived before and, although he declares that most are benign and only remain in their home because of the happiness they enjoyed there, nevertheless, there are some whose minds are filled with sorrow. These, he said, are not lovely to encounter, for they are filled with sorrow and with pain and they are harrowed up with a longing for things as they used to be. 
7 Yet, there are those whose desire it is to keep the Temple and the libraries there. They do a good work and are not bothered by the ghosts of the past. These do a good work and a good service for the people. For, though we have our records with us, yet, the libraries in Meninta are like none other we have ever found or built. They are fast up in the mountain and they are built deep and sound. Surely, there can be no greater place to keep things so precious and it is my belief that Meninta will figure in our history for a great long time. Wherefore, many do desire to go and spend time in service there. 
8 As for myself, I have remained in Elak Kowa, for it is close unto the city of Nespelem and the people have continued in their call for me to serve them as high priest. 
9 Now, in Elak Kowa and also in Nespelem, the people have asked for a council to govern the church, one such as the Lord did command Shi-Muel to form when He did visit the city of Corianton. Wherefore, I did place before the Mother’s Council the names of all those who had given thoughtful and diligent service in their callings as Peli unto their families and also unto the church. And they did take of the list and pray to discern which of them the Lord would call to the stewardship. 
10 And behold, they did choose out twelve from among the list which I did give unto them and they were nominated. Wherefore, I did take the nominations and I did publish them unto the people, and behold, the people did elect them according as the Mother’s Council did nominate. And these are the names of the Peli Council of Nespelem and of Elak Kowa: 
11 For the city of Elak Kowa, the Common Consent did elect Moronayim, Pa Sanith, Hemaket, Pawna Tan, Heth, Samith, Eapowits, Tselthiem, Tsilet, Morin, Kayalith and Por-Wanith. And they did elect me to be Feather or Head of the Council. 
12 For the city of Nespelem, the Common Consent did elect Hemniet Anith, Panith-Het, Amnikt Ahlekt, Pac-Sineth, Tor-Moniet, Tornit Akek, Hamit, Ayanit Kayanikiit, Hatgowit, Nemietnah, and Heniet-That-Pah. And they did elect Heniet-That-Pah to be Feather or Head of the Council. 
13 These are they which were called by the will of God, and also by the voice of the people to serve in their stewardships in the name of the Peacemaker. And they did counsel with the Community Councils and with the high priests and the priests, as also with the Peli of the families, in order that unity in the church might be firmly established and maintained. And behold, they did make a regulation of the Church and of its celebrations, ceremonies and ordinances. 
14 And they did also regulate that which the communities deemed important to teach all little children with regard to the gospel. And also they did publish and regulate the training of the youths in trades and in stewardships. 
15 Now, the Councils of the Nem of Nespelem were thus: The family held its own Council and elected its own Peli. The villages and settlements called up Mother’s Councils and they chose out Community Councils to help in the government of the community and the administration of the surplus offerings. 
16 The high priest was also called upon to appoint Peli to be priests and high 
priests to serve the people in the synagogues and in the High Places and they also formed a Council. And out of these did the people impose upon one to be high priest of the city. And out of these the General Council of Peli for Nespelem was called up in the manner already described. 
17 And these Councils did assist the people in governing themselves and in establishing peace and equity in the land. And behold, they did adopt the laws as set forth and recorded by Pa Nat, deeming them to be pertinent and sufficient for their purposes. 
18 And it was the charge of these Councils to administer their callings in such a manner as not to become a burden upon the people and upon their freedoms. For, the governing of the people must always remain in service to the people. Yea, the governor is nothing but the servant of the people. And when the governor begins to declare that the people are the servants of the government, then do the people have the right and the responsibility to tear down the government and place a new one in the stead thereof. This is in accordance with the Laws of God, which do always and must supersede the laws of men. 
19 And behold, I prophesy it unto you who shall open this record and read it in the hearing of people in times far distant, that this shall be a sign that the times spoken of by the Lord concerning the restoration of His kingdom and the establishing of Zion once again in this land have surely arrived. Yea, all they who shall discern the need for liberty and a just government shall be swept up in the debate and none shall escape it. And this shall be the argument: Some shall declare that the people are the servant of the sovereign, and behold, still others shall declare that the sovereign is only the servant of the people. And behold, they who believe the former shall raise up Kings and Queens to rule and reign over their elected councils. And they who believe the latter shall elect their councils to govern and the people shall be the Sovereign. 
20 But behold, they neither shall have peace in this land until they shall yield up the scepter that they have delivered up to their riches and their possessions. Yea, it shall not matter what form of election they shall extol so long as they are governed by their greed and their avarice. But they shall rage in their debate over which bad way shall be better and they shall not know peace until Zion is established in the land once again. 
21 Yea, and this shall also cause division among their churches and among their Peli. For there shall be some who shall claim dominion over the people for the sake of their stewardships. And they shall claim authority transmitted in a sacred way to justify them in their interpretation. But they shall not sow peace, but division shall be the fruits of their labors. 
22 And there shall be those who shall raise themselves up before the people because of visions and because of gifts, and they shall take dominion over the people because of them. They shall not sow peace, but division shall be the fruits of their labors. 
23 And there shall be those who, because of their great riches, the people shall elevate until they too shall declare themselves rulers over them in their churches and in their synagogues, but they shall not sow peace, and division shall be the fruits of their labors. 
24 And behold, there shall be those even who read of these records and shall hold them up an ensign unto the world and who shall declare themselves that they might have dominion over the people because of these records. They shall not sow peace but division shall be the fruits of their labors. 
25 Only they who shall receive of the commission of the Peacemaker and who labor as the servant of all shall sow peace and the fruits of their labor shall bring again Zion in the land. 
26 And I know that there shall be many who are offended at my words. For they shall esteem themselves worthy because of their religion and all their good works. Yea, they shall call me a false prophet because they shall esteem themselves to be the very elect of God. 
27 But all their religion shall be as sounding brass. For in the day of which I speak, they who should have received the fullness of the gospel shall have sinned against it. And behold, they shall not even know that they have done it because of the teachings and traditions of their fathers. Yet, they shall have rejected the word of the Peacemaker almost upon the very eve of having received it and they shall lay for generations under His condemnation. All this shall they do in a pall of ignorance because they have rejected His admonition to come unto Him and have taken up the idols of their traditions. 
28 Yea, they shall think so highly of themselves and all their works that they shall think to be saved by them and not in them. Yea, they shall declare that ordinances and observances are mighty to save, but that the presence of the Peacemaker is not essential to that salvation. Wherefore, their governors shall dole out their ordinances and shall dictate their observances and all the people shall bow themselves to their taskmasters and shall enslave themselves unto them. Sore shall be their bondage and their ignorance shall be their only salvation from it when the Peacemaker shall come to liberate them. 
29 And behold, they shall regulate their works such that only a blessed few may have the right and the authority to perform them. Yea, and all the people shall be made to flock to them and call them shepherds, for they shall have rejected all other revelation. And their shepherds shall declare their authority and none shall gainsay them. Yea, in that day, even they who would call themselves the elect of God shall declare by their works and by their traditions that it is by ordinances, and through them that have authority to perform them in the face of all the people, that salvation shall be brought and nothing else shall accomplish it. 
30 Behold, this shall be the state of things when the Lord shall bring again into the light such records as shall be preserved by Him in His wisdom. And behold, there shall be some who take of these things and shall use them for an ensample. These are they who shall bring Zion once again. These are they who shall receive the commission of the Lord and shall guide the people once again to come unto Him. 


CHAPTER 12 
1 In the fifth year after the Nem of Meninta left their valley and took up their habitation in the region which we call Nespelem, we received word from the Nem of the Plains that the waters of the great gulf were receding and that much land had been raised up into the air because of the loss of the water in the gulf. And the gulf was reduced in size by much water, insomuch that islands did appear also. 
2 And it must also be noted that, because the West Sea did also lose ground before the land, that new gulfs and bays were formed that did not exist in the times of our fathers. Yea, barely might the land be recognized the same as when Hagoth took his journey into the West Sea. And of this we were also told by the inhabitants of the Coasts and of the Islands of the Sea. Wherefore, the people did marvel much that the land could change so in but one generation. 
3 And the rains and snows are greatly diminished, to the degree that much that was grown in many places may not now be grown as crops because of the lack of moisture. 
4 But the Nem do adapt themselves well to changing circumstances and we have suffered no hardships because of these changes. Behold, that the winter is less severe is no hardship to us at all and a warmer, dryer summer suits the grasses that grow and give provender for our horses. Nay, I must say, we are not bothered by the changing ways of the seasons because we do adapt to our surroundings. 
5 Now, I have heard of the doings of the people who have inhabited the region where father Hagoth first built his settlement. And we call that place and the region round about it, the Land of Hagoth, but others know it by other names. 
6 In those places the water gathered in by the mountains is most precious and any lack of it causes great hardship. And we understand that the people there have gathered into large settlements and cities. Wherefore, we do worry about them, for if they overburden the land, even land that is taxed by a lack of moisture, then shall they not suffer that which has been the bane of the inhabitants of that region in times past? 
7 And many are the people who have moved into the region that has been brought into the air because of the retreat of the great gulf in the south. These people are come up from the Land Southward and they bring their customs and traditions with them. We keep clear of that place, for we do not wish to excite the Gadianton Robbers whom we know are among them. 
8 But they do not seem interested in our country, for we no longer live as they do, lusting after gain. Yea, we plant for our upkeep but not for gain. And we do not dig in the earth to find the precious things thereof in order that we might adorn ourselves beautifully. Behold, this seems to be the very purpose of existence in the lands to the south. But since this is not our way, the people of the south do not seem to think of us, and this is much to our liking. 
9 And behold, the lake country is reduced to hundreds of smaller lakes and but a few very large bodies of water, instead of the great lakes of the past. And the Nem of Corianton find it more and more difficult to keep to themselves as they were wont to do in times past. For theirs is no longer a fortress of waters and any traveler may find their way into their region now. This has caused some changes for them and many of them have moved further into the north country, even nigh unto the place of cold and snows that last most of the year. And even some have come into our country and have joined themselves with the Nespelem and with the Nem of the Coasts. Nevertheless, there are many who remain in the land where Corianton found them in the beginning of his sojourn in the Land Northward. 
10 And behold, we see less of the visitors from across the East Sea and also from across the West Sea as in times past. Some few still travel into our region but not so many as before and the tales they tell are all of darkness and woe. Surely a great darkness has begun to spread itself across the countries of the earth and a great spiritual dearth has overtaken the nations. 
11 For, it does appear to us, and this observation we make because of the stories we have been told by the few travelers who come into our lands, that the ways of the Lord are foreign to most men in the earth. And this does make our hearts break for the people who must live under such darkness. 
12 But few are they who come into the Land Northward from lands across the sea anymore. Yea, I can only remember meeting but two in the past ten years and I have heard of only three others that were not of the Nem of the Islands. And behold, even they tell of how dangerous it is for them to navigate the sea in an easterly direction because of the viciousness of the pirates who sail there. Wherefore, they do not go in that direction anymore and have lost contact with their own people who went into the countries that lie to the East to settle. 
13 And it is five hundred and fifty two years since the Lord did visit the Nem and establish peace in all the land. And behold, we do still follow Him and His precepts. For we do esteem ourselves to be the children of the Peacemaker and He is our Lord and our Master. 


CHAPTER 13 
1 And in the five hundred and sixty-seventh year, behold, a great body of people did arrive among the Nem of the Coasts and beg leave of the, that they might take up their residence there. For they had been driven upon the seas for the more part of a year and they were torn and weary. Wherefore, they were accepted and taken in, and succored by our relations on the coast and they became part of the Nem. 
2 And behold, they told of wars and of pestilences and of famines and of plagues in the country from which they did travel. Yea, and so great were their losses because of the hardship of their flight that only the tenth part of them escaped to the West alive. And they wanted for everything. Yea, their state was pitiable. 
3 But they did accept the manner in which we live. Yea, they had taken up the Common Consent before they had left their homeland and they had been persecuted because of it. They had all things in common and had attempted to live by this law in the place of their fathers, but the people were wicked and persecuted them. Behold, they were driven from country to country and none gave them place. Wherefore, when they come into the shores of the Nem, even though they were a great people still, they told of how they had dwindled to the tithe of their former numbers. 
4 And they were a sea-loving people. Wherefore, the Nem did suggest places along the ocean where they might build settlements and begin again to live as the Spirit had instructed them. And they did establish service missions among them and sent them teachers whom they gratefully accepted. 
5 Now, this people were of small and compact stature and their features were like unto the people who dwell in the north countries that are found across the West Sea. And they speak a language that is not far sundered from that which is spoken by the Nem of the Coasts, for that language has been added upon by the travelers and settlers that have come from that country. 
6 And the leader of this people was Hin. And he was a man of wisdom who told of how his fathers lived in a great land that could be found by crossing over the West Sea and when landfall is reached, by traveling again into the north. And he told of people who came in unto their country to live and that they taught his fathers their ways and their customs, and they became one people. These people called themselves Nemen and they came from the Islands of the West Sea. 
7 But the rulers of his nation grew wicked and the people with them. And they persecuted the Nemen and all they who joined with them in their peculiar way of living. And when Hin decided to lead the remnant of that people away back into the east, there were many who chose to journey with him. These were the remnants of a kindred people who had left the Nem of the Islands to settle in other lands, but now they were come again home at last. Yea, they had found a home again among their own kindred. 
8 And behold, it was at the same time as the appearance of the Nem of Hin, and their union with the Nem of the Coasts, that Timothy did visit the people of Nespelem. He it was who told us of the arrival of Hin and his people and we sent emissaries to greet them and to welcome them. 
9 Timothy is the brother of Nephi and of Lehi, who is called Mathonihah by this people. And he has visited from time to time. These brothers are wonderful in their wisdom and in their gifts, for they walked and talked with the Peacemaker when He came to visit the people of this land. Yea, I say unto you, that they did walk and talk as we do in the day that the Peacemaker appeared from out of commotion and ministered to our people. 
10 Now, Timothy has for his stewardship the teaching of the people who live here in the Land Northward and also they who live in the Land Southward. He is our minister and he assists us in keeping the sure way of the Lord. 
11 And Nephi has for his stewardship the teaching and observing of the people who live in the lands of our fathers, even round about Jerusalem of old, and he does travel in the lands to the west and to the south of that place. 
12 And Mathonihah has for his stewardship the teaching and observing of the people who live in the lands of our fathers, even round about Jerusalem of old, and he does travel in the lands to the east and to the north of that place. 
13 And they live and do not taste of death. Neither do they taste of sickness or of pain as we do. Or, in other words, they do not suffer such things in the way in which we do. For they do suffer pain and hunger, but they do not die of it. But, notwithstanding they are preserved from such things, that they might accomplish the thing that they desired of the Lord, they are harrowed up by the things they see. For they must witness all the wickedness of men in all the lands of the earth, and this must harrow up their souls. 
14 And behold, they are directed in all things by that Apostle who was the beloved of the Lord when He too walked the earth as a man. Yea, John is the Chief Disciple of their Council. 
15 The work of these translated men is a work of instruction unto all people who might listen unto the voice of their counsel. And also, when the Lord’s church and His ways are found among the people, these three assist them in regulating themselves, that they might retain the direction of the Peacemaker. But, if the shepherds and the servants of the Lord do become puffed up in the pride of their hearts, behold, tales of these shall become but a myth and a fable unto the people of that time. 
16 Now, at the same time as the Nemen of Hin came into the land to take up their place among their relations, Timothy did also appear as a man walking from the east. And he did tell somewhat of the arrival and of the history of the Nemen of Hin. And that history is written and is hid up with the records of the Nem of the Coasts. And behold, that record shall come forth in the due time of the Lord for the benefit of all people. 
17 And Timothy did remain some time with the Nem of Nespelem, and also he did go over unto the Nem of Potal to teach them also. And the words and the teachings of the Three are of great import unto us, for we believe that they are sent of God and that they are the servants of the Peacemaker. Wherefore, we cherish their words and we do follow their teachings. And these are some of the words of Timothy when he visited the Nem of Nespelem: 
18 Behold, the Lord is with you, Nem. You walk in a sacred manner, as also your talk is in a sacred manner. You did come out from iniquity because you will insist upon following the counsels of the Lord. Yea, you abandon home and hearth, merely because you esteem the Lord more than you do the stuff of the earth. And behold, you esteem Him more than you do your customs and your traditions. Even do you esteem the Lord greater than the land of your fathers. And this is folly in the sight of men, but I say unto you, Nem, it is of great worth unto the Lord. Yea, He is pleased with you. 
19 But this is not all. You do also continue in that thing wherein He did teach your forefathers. Yea, you do continue to teach the New and Everlasting Covenant that He revealed unto them in times past. Behold, this is a thing seldom seen in the world in these times. For there is no nation under heaven except the Nem that continues in the gospel of the Peacemaker. 
20 Yea, believe me when I say that you are a blessed people. For, the Lord blesses them that believe on Him and hold fast to that which He has taught them. And blessed are you, Nem. 
21 And what is it that you teach that has preserved your peace, even when all the world around you is harrowed up in war and bloodshed? Behold, what is your safeguard against that turmoil in the which the whole world is embroiled. Is it that your wise men have more wisdom? I say unto you, Nay. For, you are only as wise as any. 
22 It is that you do keep the Way of the Lord. Yea, it is that you do walk upon the Way which He has provided for all they who believe in His name and who wish to obtain greater truth and knowledge. But it is not that you are born more intelligent, never believe it. 
23 For the children of men are born in this natural state in like manner as all the living things upon the earth are born. And if they continue in this state, so shall they remain, lives and deaths everlasting, for they are satisfied to be ruled by the natural man. 
24 But if they will be elevated and set aside this natural man, the Lord shall welcome them upon the Way to receive greater wisdom and knowledge. And behold, they are changed even in their physical, and this is a thing that must be so. For, the natural man may only take up that knowledge that is useful to the survival of the race. Wherefore, what knowledge he may acquire is of a kind and a nature that will serve himself. But, when the children of men do stretch themselves past that knowledge which conveys from the strength of the arm of the flesh, they are elevated above the world, worlds without end. 
25 And behold, in the crisis of your faith, you did set aside all the needs of the natural man and you did teach the laws and statutes of the kingdom of God. Yea, you did even send out missionaries to teach the laws of God, so greatly did the Spirit pull upon your intellects. And I declare unto you, These are the things that do elevate a man or a nation. 
26 And the things that are important to all the world, you set aside as if they were a thing of naught. Yea, did you not set aside homes? And I know that some of you had lived in such places many generations and all your good memories are there. Yet, in the conflict and the crisis, you did pack up your few things and you did take to the wilderness. And why would you do this? It is because the house is built to accommodate the family, and yet, it is not the family. 
27 And behold, you were not caught up in the pride of your hearts because someone decided that your way was not adequate for their needs. You found it not necessary that all men speak and act as you do. Nay, but pride did not make you dictators. Nevertheless, you did defend the faith. But pride would have proven your destruction just as it did your adversaries. Behold how you did vanquish the enemies of God, but you did not do it in the pride of your hearts. 
28 And your little ones are taught that they must seek the face of the Lord to obtain the gospel. And they are taught obedience at the feet of the Peacemaker. I ask you, shall they ever be despoiled of this great blessing? Shall any ruler or despot wrest from them this boon? Shall any false prophet gainsay them, or bring them into the bondage of the soul? And if they are ever taken into bondage, where is the sting? For behold, can any petty ruler be esteemed greater than the Lord of Heaven? 
29 And shall any man raise himself up to be the arm of the Lord without that all the people shall be able to prove his claim? Shall any deceiver raise himself up to lead the people astray when they have communion with Angels and with the Peacemaker Himself? Behold, this shall never be, so long as your little ones are taught from their youths to seek that revelation which comes of the Lord, and directly. 
30 And behold, all your sacrifices are selfless, and in this is the Lord greatly pleased. Yea, there is no self service in your oblations, and this is because you have taught the first law. For, how can anyone be misled in the sacrifice and in the offerings when their schoolmaster is the Peacemaker? Surely, a man may teach you false doctrine and thereby lead you into strange sacrifice. But the Lord shall never do it. Strait is His way and narrow the gate. But you have sought His face early and cannot be deceived in anything. 
31 And behold again, in all your families there is fidelity. Yea, men do honor their covenants and women do faithfully serve their families. And there is no wantonness, nor the strife that comes of it. And men do not break the hearts of their wife or their children with adultery. And behold, women are not found in wickedness. Is there any nation on earth where such things do not corrupt the hearts of the children of men? I say unto you, Yea! It is found among the Nem. 
32 Behold, where men and women make durable covenants in the Lord, shall He not uphold those covenants? When the man and the woman are sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise, with whom the Peacemaker has made His covenant, even that covenant He made with the Father and the Holy Ghost before the world was, shall He not take up such covenants as His own, when the man and the woman are made His? Wherefore are you become eternal and your marriage is eternal, even from everlasting to everlasting, for heaven and earth shall pass away, yet all that is His shall be durable forever. 
33 It is because that you do hold fast unto these teachings that you are the more able to put away the natural man. And herein lies your greatest blessing, for it is the fullness of your faith, even the fullness of the gospel. Yea, because of these precepts it is made the easier for you to cast off the natural man and create Zion in your hearts. And when Zion is created in the hearts of the people, shall it be prevented in the foundation? Shall not Zion become the charter of the nation? 
34 For, shall you do differently in the administration of your civil duty than you do in your home? Shall you teach your children one thing and the citizens another? I say unto you, Shall a man attempt such duplicity, his efforts shall not survive the generation. 
35 But when the laws of the Peacemaker are not taught in the home, see you how the nation is corrupted. When children are taught that the father is sovereign and that his will is the gospel in the home, shall they seek the face of the Peacemaker? If the law of the home is the law of the father or of the mother, and they make of themselves tyrants unto their children, shall the children learn to follow the King of Heaven while yet in the home? 
36 And when the sacrifice is determined for them by the father or the mother, how will they ever look to the Lord to determine their sacrifice. And if they make their oblations upon the commands of the father or the mother, shall their sacrifice ever cease to be dictated by some other person, some ruler? If their offering in their youth is made to satisfy the demands of men or women, shall they ever make a suitable sacrifice when they are grown? Shall they break their hearts and throw off the natural man? Shall they sit at the feet of the Peacemaker and be instructed? 
37 And if they are taught in their youths to respect the dictates of their father or their mother and to seek not to honor them by the confirmation of the Holy Ghost in all things, shall they ever seek such confirmation in anything else? Can they be expected to change their custom simply because they become fathers and mothers? Shall they not also dictate all things unto their children? Is equity taught in this manner? 
38 And shall men join themselves in fidelity when they have been taught to dictate in the home? Shall the father and the mother ever work diligently to serve their children in faith when they have been raised to respect the will of the tyrant? Shall their unions ever be blessed and sealed up unto the Lord by the Holy Spirit of Promise? I say unto you, Nay. For how can you expect the Lord to take up wickedness? 
39 Can any who has studied unrighteous dominion in the home ever hope to set the world and its ways aside? Can the Law of Consecration ever be understood by such a one? It is impossible and cannot be expected. It is for this cause that the Lord did teach your forefathers the laws and ordinances of the High Place in the very manner in which He did. Yea, His ways are wise and He has all things before Him. Wherefore, do not distrust the instruction He gave unto your fathers. 
40 Behold, Nem, you are an ensign unto the world and an ensample. Shall the world ever say that the Lord’s purposes are too difficult for the children of men to accomplish? Shall the world ever justify itself in perverting the laws of God? Shall men ever justify a lesser law because the people cannot live the greater? 
41 Behold all these things shall be in the mouths of men in latter days, but the Nem shall have laid a foundation for all men. Such false prophets and wicked rulers shall lay the account upon the people, but the fault thereof shall be their own. Yea, the Lord shall cease to reveal anything unto their prophets and generations shall pass in which He shall hold His peace and give no instruction through them. But behold, a time shall come when the people shall cast such rulers aside and turn again to their Lord and seek His face. Behold, Nem, the ensample that you make for them shall assist them and shall edify them. 
42 But even these shall not make serious conquest of the world. Yea, I say unto you, Even they unto whom the Lord shall have given the commencement of the restoration of all things shall not walk in sound principles and they shall lead the nation in false doctrine. But mothers and fathers shall teach their children in spite of all their shepherds shall demand. And here a few, and there a few, shall the Lord build up again a Zion in the land, but not out of the ashes of a fallen church. 
43 Behold, He shall take away the stewardship and the keys of His kingdom from among the Gentiles. And when they are taken back, even according as He has promised unto your ancestors, they shall not be given back unto them that did pervert His ways. But He shall not withhold such things from the children of men, nay, not even for a season. For, in the very same generation in which He shall take up the stewardship over His kingdom on earth from out of the Gentiles, He shall also restore the Sons and Daughters of Lehi and of Levi. It is unto these that your teachings shall be an ensign. Yea, it is unto these that your musings shall be instructive. 
44 For they shall have been prepared by all that the Lord did accomplish through the Gentiles. And even there shall be some few from among the Gentiles who shall continue to be His servants, and shall set aside the riches and the enticements of the world to serve Him. They shall not want of reward. Nay, behold, they shall be numbered in among the children of Lehi by adoption. And all wherein the Lord has blessed them shall also be a blessing unto they who become the Sons and Daughters of Lehi and of Levi. But they shall not pollute the way of the Lord with the filthiness of men. 
45 But the rulers of the people shall wallow in their own judgment. Yea, they shall be drunken as with bad wine, which is bought from the disreputable. Yea, the wine of their sacrament shall have been thinned down with water of the trough and it shall be unfit to drink. Thinned and polluted shall be the cup that they take to their lips in the name of the Lord and their sacrifice shall be unprofitable. 
46 And the goodness of the grain shall they winnow out and there shall be no substance left in the bread. They shall be fat with bread that shall have been bought with the strength of the innocent. Yea, the bread of their sacrament shall have no part in the covenant of the Lord but shall be a token of their bondage only and shall be unfit to eat. Yet shall they hold it up unto the Lord and say: 
47 This is thy body, Lord. We eat it in remembrance of our covenants with Thee. 
48 Behold, they have sold the profitable out of the grain before ever they held it up as a sacrifice unto the Lord. 
49 And shall He respect their sacrifice? Shall He think of it in any better light than He did the sacrifice of Cain? Is He become no discerner of the hearts of men? Or does He know less the motives and intentions of men now than He did when Cain and Abel made their first sacrifices? Nay, but there is one sacrifice in the last days that He will accept and justify and that is the fullness of a heart broken in pure sacrifice and the fullness of a spirit made contrite in the blood of the Lamb of God. 
50 By the sweat of his brow does man break the earth, and dung it, and plant the grain and care for it. Then by that same sweat does he reap down the corn and winnow it. And whole and wholesome as his own intention does he labor to make the bread and bake it. This is the broken heart, and anything else than this is not justified. Let the sacrifice of bread be whole and not in parts. 
51 Yea, by the sweat of his brow shall man set in the earth the vine and nurture it. And he is certain to ready the bees ere the blossom is set and prepare them. And when the fruit is laid on, does he not carefully judge the time to harvest? Yea, and he does gather in with his strength the fruit of the vine to the winepress and stamp it out with his feet. And the sacrifice is pure wine, of his own make, and is not purchased from afar off. 
52 Take not up the polluted to offer it a sacrifice unto the Lord. Take not up that which is taught of men and make it up as doctrine and the will of God. This is the sacrifice of bad intention. Such was the sacrifice of Cain and the Lord accepted it not. Neither shall He accept bad water and empty bread for your sacraments. Let your oblations be of full heart and your sacraments be of good intention and the Lord shall accept it, as He did Abel’s. And the Gentiles who are gathered into the House of Israel shall be made new by the good sacrifice, casting away that which is empty and taking up that which is full of grace. 
53 This is the thing which shall be taken up by the Remnant of the House of Israel that shall be left in this land in the last days. Behold, they shall not take up that which the Gentiles have already polluted and wrest it again. Nay, the hide beaten poorly by the Gentiles shall not be softened and shall not be made respectable. Nor shall the darkened and scorched linen of the Gentiles be made white at the hands of the Remnant. But they shall take up that which was softened and whitened in times past and with it they shall bring again Zion. 
54 The field planted by the Gentiles shall be filled with vice. Wherefore, shall the Remnant take residence in such a field? Shall they, as squatters, take of that which the Gentiles have made waste and with it fatten the calf? Nay. But they shall harrow up the ground anew and plant anew. For, the fertile earth shall have lain fallow at the hands of absent stewards who knew it not. And the Remnant shall plow it up once again and plant it. And it shall once again bare the grain that shall fatten the Remnant. 
55 For the vineyard shall have lain desolate in the sloth of the unprofitable servant. And when the Lord of the vineyard shall take up the stewardship from him and give it into the hands of another, then shall the old vines be cast down and the new stock set and the rows renewed. And shall he take of the diseased root to plant again? I say unto you, Nay. But he shall find a good and profitable strain out of a vineyard which is distant, and this shall he use to restore the vine of the Lord’s House. 
56 Then shall the Lord of the Vineyard come in from His journey and see the good steward and His profitable servant. 
57 Do you see, then, how good and profitable your writings shall be unto them that the Lord shall raise up in this land in the latter day? Can you discern how they shall take up your precept and your principle and carry it into the vineyards of their intentions? Yea, they shall take the seed laid up in store by you and plant it in the fallow earth and it shall prosper. They shall take up the root preserved by you and plant it in their hearts and Zion shall grow up again in the land. 
58 Wherefore, I do not praise you out of reason. I observe your doing and foreknow the good that the Lord shall do with it. Do but continue in it, Nem, for in this is your happiness now, but also out of your doings shall the Remnant of the House of Israel set in order the House of God and renew the stewardship. And in that day the just shall receive their stewardship not by the dictate of any man, but by the voice of the Lord and their surplus shall they render up to the poor of their own and without commandment. 
59 Yea, they shall read of your works in days far sundered from you. And some shall scorn them because they did not flow unto them from out of the mouths of their shepherds, whom they have justified. Behold, for no greater sin than to have come from out of the dust and to be delivered by one other than their own prophets, many shall turn the heal from your words. 
60 And again behold, many shall spurn your works because they contradict that which they hold by their own knowledge to be true. The writings and record of your days shall come to them in a time when their wise men shall declare that such things could never have happened. 
61 And yet, in the midst of this turmoil over man’s knowledge and the strength of the arm of the flesh, some few will read them with pure intent. These are they who will subject your records unto the Holy Ghost to discern what portion of them shall be useful unto them in their times. Behold, and it shall happen that, because of the curious work of the Lord in the last days, these few shall have flowing through them the blood of Lehi and they shall be a Remnant of the House of Israel, though they shall also be of Gentile lineage. 
62 This is the fullness of the Gentiles and the fullness of the Jews. These shall not be daunted by the ridicule of their neighbors. Nay, nor shall they be swayed by the doctrines and sciences of men. Nor even shall they be turned away by the heel of their shepherds, who shall persecute them. But they, being firm in the faith of their fathers, shall read your words and shall subject them to the confirmation of the Holy Spirit of Promise. 
63 Then shall this record become an ensign unto them. They shall take wisdom from it, and also they shall be encouraged. For, with what they learn in the pages that shall be translated by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost, they shall come out of Babylon and take not up her unclean thing anymore. They shall withstand the buffetings of the world and the jeering of the rabble mob and they shall lift up an emblem of peace and of charity to all the world. 
64 And the wisdom of the wise shall conspire against them. For, the wise men shall have already determined by the application of all their knowledge and science, that your people could not have lived at all, let alone record your doings on plates of metal. But this shall not sway the Remnant left in the land in the last days. They shall already know that man’s knowledge is weak and his wisdom and science is not steady. 
65 And harshness and persecution shall not return the faith of the people to the shepherds who use it to extort such faithfulness. Nay, evil speaking of the Lord’s Anointed shall turn many from exploring your doings, but not all. There shall be some who retain a knowledge and a witness more sure than that which is conveyed to them from the mouths of such shepherds. These are they who shall remember to prove all things by the power of the Holy Ghost. Yea, these are they who shall not be separated from God, but shall exercise their right to the wisdom and the mysteries of godliness. 
66 And they shall be Heirs with Christ in the Kingdom of God, for they shall not deny the Holy Ghost, but shall seek His confirmation of all things. These are they unto whom the Lord shall extend His almighty hand once again and they shall walk in His dignity. Yea, they shall see Him face to face, as their ancestors did. Through them shall the Lord once again order His house and theirs shall be the victory and the reward of heaven. 
67 Yea, you may rejoice in your posterity in the last days, for they shall again establish Zion in this land. They shall do it in their hearts and they shall teach their children the ways of the Lord in their homes. Then shall their children combine together to do the Lord’s work and none shall separate them again. Yea, there shall be no division in the House of the Lord when they shall cast off the yoke of bondage and raise up a Zion again. 


CHAPTER 14 
1 Now, I would not that you should be downcast because that I have prophesied concerning your descendents in the latter days, how that they shall again establish Zion in the land. Yea, I do discern your hearts that you are cast down because of my words. But do not let your hearts be troubled over my words. 
2 Behold, it is certain that the Nem shall not always live in the happy state in which one may look upon you now. Yea, there shall be changes in this land and, although I will tell you that the Nem shall dwindle and all but disappear from off the face of the land, yet shall there be some few here and there that will retain the memory of the doings of their ancestors and they shall revere them. This reverence shall also help to bring about a remembrance of them and of their doing. Yea, it shall be this tiny remembrance that shall induce some few of your descendents to look back again and seek to translate your records. 
3 But behold, were it not for that which shall remain of your ways and your customs, even these would find no inducement to look back upon the vistas of time to do the great work to which they shall be called. Yea, each of them shall hear of their ancestors and be in wonder of the things they did, and they shall desire more understanding. And the Lord shall lead them into that place where they shall find the records you do so diligently keep and they shall set their hands to the translation of them. Behold, the things that you write, see how they shall excite the minds and the hearts of them that seek the face of Christ! 
4 But behold, I would not that you should be downhearted even at this time because that the Nem shall not always enjoy that freedom and happiness which you do at this time. For there shall be many years yet in which the Nem shall prosper in the land and your decline shall be slow. 
5 But there shall come decline even among the Nem when the people cease to be one in that unity with which the Lord does now bless you. And that unity shall not be broken until the people forget the Lord and His ways and cease to trouble the Spirit in all things. When they shall have become hardened in their pride and lifted up, then shall the Lord turn His face from even them, and they shall dwindle. 
6 And in the day that the Lord shall bring the Gentiles into this land, there shall be but a few villages of Nem left in the land. In those days, the Gentiles shall esteem all the inhabitants of the land the same and they shall not take time to understand them. Even the pure in heart shall be cast to and fro and trampled by the will and the industry of the Gentiles. 
7 And behold, let not three generations pass by after the coming of the Gentiles into the land and there will remain but a very small remnant of the Sons and Daughters of Lehi to be counted. Then shall they be tossed aside as dross and cast down, and trod upon. Yea, their faces shall be ground in the earth and they shall become the least of peoples. And this shall be the state of the people unto the fourth and fifth generation. But behold, out of them shall rise up a nation. Yea, out of them shall the Lord reorder His church and kingdom. 
8 For, though they shall be tossed aside, yet shall the Gentiles take them up even unto themselves secretly and their blood shall be mingled. Then shall the blood of Israel burn in the Gentile heart. Then shall the fullness of the Gentiles come. Yea, the spirit of Nem shall cry out within them and their hearts shall swell with a remembrance of things they never saw. Words and wisdom shall rise up within them, words they never heard. And they shall step forward to heal the earth, speaking words of comfort and of peace in a land torn with discord. 
9 And when all the world is bent on using up the good of the Earth, the spirit of Nem shall rise up in the hearts of the Remnant and they shall turn from the world. Yea, they shall bend the knee reverently and take up the earth in their hands and kiss it. And they shall call the earth after our Mother in Heaven, and they shall care for it. 
10 Behold, your descendents shall come away from the cities and the high towers that the Gentiles shall build up as a monument to their own might and they shall bend their backs again with the Earth and make of it a hallowed garden again. They shall speak of her as a person and they shall revere her as if she were their own grandmother. And this they shall do figuratively, but this image shall shape the characters of their children and prepare them to do a great work among the children of men. 
11 Yea, they shall also turn once again to the Peacemaker to learn the Gospel, and they shall be obedient to His teaching. And their sacrifices shall be unto them a schoolmaster and they shall learn to walk in the ways of the Lord once again, for He shall not turn His face from they who do diligently seek Him. 
12 And their covenants that they make one with another shall once again be durable, for the Lord and Sovereign of Heaven shall bind them and the Holy Ghost shall seal them up. Yea, they shall be once again the House and Kingdom of the Lord. They shall not be puffed up in the pride of their hearts and shall not turn in all directions to declare their own worthiness. But the Lord shall call them worthy and He shall bless them and prosper them. 
13 And they shall receive again the stewardship of the Lord. Yea, He shall install them once again over the vineyard and they shall be good stewards unto Him, not being commanded in all things, nor subject unto the bondage of any man. But willing and fruitful servants unto the Lord they shall be and obedient to His will. 
14 Then shall they have all things once again in common, for there shall be no poor among them. Yea, each shall be the good steward of the Lord and they shall all labor with their might for their own maintenance. But they shall also labor day and night to provide for the needy. And the beggar shall have no place to set up his stall, for he shall be 
brought in and never allowed to put up his petition. Yea, and thus shall be their villages and their settlements. Behold, they shall all labor for the good of each and every other, that there shall be no poor in the House of the Lord. 
15 And there shall be wars and rumors of wars and the nation around them shall burn with the wrath of the people one against each other. But behold, they among your descendents who shall have been called up, the Remnant of Israel, shall not suffer because of the strife that shall prevail in the land. But being perceived as unprofitable by their neighbors, the strife shall pass by them like the whirlwind. 
16 Yea, theirs shall be the only peace in the land in many places and wherever they are established, their neighbors shall wonder at them. Nevertheless, they shall possess nothing that the rabble mob shall desire. They shall be peculiar, but this shall not be enough to entice the Gadianton Robbers to molest them. And behold, because they shall not be caught up in the getting and retaining of riches, they shall have no part or party in the things that drive their neighbors to violence one against another. 
17 For it is a peculiar thing when Zion is established that the curse upon the land is taken away. And you are aware of the curse that has been placed upon this land according to the word of the Lord. Behold, part of this curse shall sorely vex the Gentiles. For they do work diligently with their hands to acquire great wealth. Yea, they do wear out their lives and this motive shall become their entire purpose and they shall set their eye singly unto it. 
18 But, according to the blessing and curse that has been laid upon this land, when they seek to obtain riches, but not with their purpose set on the glory of God, all that they lay aside shall become slippery and they shall not be able to hold onto it. Yea, and it shall be thus in this land, that when a man lays up his riches, thinking that they will be safe until he returns to them, he shall not find them. 
19 And behold, a thing that shall be esteemed of great worth in one season shall suddenly lose its worth and be good only to be cast aside. Wherefore, men shall work all their lives to amass wealth, but in the end, they shall find that all that they have amassed shall have no value. 
20 And when their riches lose their worth, they shall become angry with their fellow man and esteem all to be robbers of his wealth. This shall be a thing that does drive many people to madness and there shall be much sorrow and much destruction because of it. Yea, the desire for riches and for costly things shall overcome the desire of the love of God and the people shall move greedily upon the face of the earth consuming all before them. And when that which they esteemed of the greatest worth loses its value, they shall be as maddened by their lack as by their abundance. 
21 But they who establish Zion in the latter days shall not hold the things of the world in greater esteem than they do their Lord. They shall want for nothing, for their desires shall not be to amass riches but to provide for their needs. And the surplus of their goods they shall freely give unto the needy. 
22 And where their neighbors shall consume all things before them, your descendents shall produce all the things they need. Behold, I discern your wonder at my words and I see your confusion. How can a people consume the earth and produce not for their own needs? This seems impossible to you. But behold, I say unto you and I forewarn you, There shall come a day in this land when the people shall not labor with their hands and provide for their own needs. But every one will labor for riches and with these riches they shall buy up the things they need from a very few who produce them. And all of their substance shall go toward the purchase of the fruit and labor of others, and very often, their fruit shall come from afar to be consumed by the people. Because of this, all the riches that they might amass must be spent in buying the things that they need to sustain themselves from day to day. 
23 And does this fill you with wonder? Behold, I tell you that even they who live in this manner shall call themselves blessed and they shall scorn and ridicule those who live not as they do. Yea, they shall esteem as savage the life of he who produces all the things that they must purchase with all their wealth. Nay, do not stare! For such shall be the way of things when your descendents shall turn away from the way of the world and work to bring again the Zion of the Lord. 
24 Wherefore, be glad in your hearts, Nem, that you do not live in such times. Be glad that you live in a time when Zion does flourish in the land. And give thanks that the earth does put forth abundantly of her bounty. For it shall not always be so. Yea, there comes a time when even the earth shall not give freely because of the wickedness of men. And Zion shall be a rare thing in the earth. Behold, they are perilous times in which the Remnant shall begin again the work of the Lord. 
25 And continue in the commandments. For in keeping the way of the Lord, you do demonstrate that you do walk and talk with Him on the Way. And what greater demonstration of your faith might there be than this? You are greatly blessed, even above all the peoples of the world. Behold, you are among the few peoples who wait upon the Lord and learn His ways, and because of this, you are prospered more than any other people. Yea, who can tell when last any man of the Nem had need of taking up the sword against an enemy? Yet, in all the world there is no peace to be found except where men and women know their Lord and walk uprightly before Him. Behold, this is the great demonstration of faith.
26 And you know wherewith the Lord has blessed you and wherein you have been prospered beyond measure. But I would have you know the manner in which you do bless and benefit all things because of the manner in which you live.
27 Behold, I would call your minds to that which I did teach the Nem in times past, how that when you exercise faith you do cause a movement upon the matter of creation. When any matter is moved upon, behold, it is within the measure of its creation that it should move upon yet other matter. This movement continues outward from its point of origin, or in other words, from the original action. Now, this continues until it does return again to its origination. For all things may be described as one eternal round. And if all things may be so described, then the Universe is spherical.
28 And the same principle applies to all kinds and types of faith. For despair does also create this same kind of motion in the Universe. And it also moves outward from the source thereof continually until it too returns again unto its origination.
29 Therefore, it may be said that there is good faith and there is bad faith, or in other words, there is good intention and good action which brings about much good, and there is bad intention and bad action which brings about much evil. But faith is the action which causes the Universe to apply the principles round about which it is bound
30 Now, when the movement of all things does return again unto its own source, and finds there great faith for good, the movement does combine again with that faith, which is a movement outward once again, and the good is greatly magnified.
31 And again, when the movement is caused by bad intentions and actions, that movement does also return again unto its own source. And if it finds there great faith for evil, the movement does combine even with that evil and it also is greatly magnified.
32 But behold, should evil movement flow out from the children of men and in continuing in its movement it returns again and encounters powerful movements of good, then is that evil countered in its movement. Yea, the outflowing good does so interfere with the power of the returning evil that it does counter it and cancel it.
33 Wherefore, I would call your attention to that great miracle which is made by the Zion which the Nem in this land have established. For, the rest of the world languishes in darkness and there is little of the love of God in any of the nations of the world. But so much more powerful is the good than the evil that when the two encounter each other, behold, the evil is diminished.
34 But did you think that Zion blesses only those who live in it? Zion is the pure in heart, even the very heart of the world. And the Lord does judge the intent of the heart. Shall there be good men and good women in the world but know little of the kingdom of God, yet I assure you, their good works act upon the Universe in like manner as do yours. Therefore, always remember, Nem, good does beget good. And when great faith is exercised, or in other words, when great movement for good is made upon the Universe, great shall be the good that shall be magnified unto they who exercise such faith, even unto the healing of the world.
35 Wherefore, you may know nothing of the people of the far reaches and corners of the world. What is that to you? Do good. And also, you may know much about the evil that is committed by the wicked in some place or other. Again I say unto you, What is that to you? Do good continually. For, you know not but what your goodness might even have effect upon far distant people.
36 Remember that which has been written about King Mosiah. Behold, did his sons not do wickedness in all the Land Southward? Yet, is it not so that because of the prayers of their father they were brought to a miracle? And were they not so changed that they became the greatest preachers of their people? You may believe it, for, had it not been for their preaching, it is most likely true that you might never have been placed in the happy state in which you find yourselves.
37 For behold, their preaching did create a generation of Lamanites who set aside the wickedness of their fathers. These became the Anti-Nephi-Lehies, whom we call the Children of Ammon. And did the Lord not teach them upon the Way, and instruct them in meaningful and beautiful celebrations? Yea, it is because of the preaching of the sons of Mosiah the King that the Nem have the Purification of the Ammonites and also the ordinances of the High Place. Now, do you see how the great acts and utterances of faith of one who is conscious to do good may make great effect upon the wicked? You may believe me, your good works do likewise.
38 Our purpose is not to learn to do evil. The Lord did not enter into the covenant with the Father and with the Holy Spirit of Promise so that we might become versed and expert in the practice of corruption. On the contrary, we are placed in this New and Everlasting Covenant to learn to do good continually. Behold, it is for this cause that the Lord has instructed you in the teachings, principles, laws and the ordinances of the High Place. Behold, these things do not teach but a little good. Nay, they are not a paltry attempt at marginal goodness. Rather, He has taught us an elevating law so that we might begin to act out an elevating goodness. Behold, this magnifying faith does destroy the works of darkness. Behold, the exercise of this faith shall bring about the restoration of all things.
39 I tell you these things that your minds may not be troubled because I said that the Nem shall dwindle and barely shall any rightly be able to say in the last days, ere the Lord does raise up again the Remnant of the House of Israel again in this land, that Zion is found anywhere. But behold, content yourselves with this foreknowledge, that from among your descendents, Zion shall once again be established. And behold, before the Lord does come again in His great glory, there shall surely be a righteous people to greet Him in this blessed land.
40 And He shall use your doings to inspire your descendents to take up His ways once again and to raise up a standard to all the world. Behold, they shall look to and fro for an ensample to use as their model, but there shall be none in the world. For the shepherds of the church shall teach that Zion is a thing other than that which you have been taught. Wherefore, they shall not be an ensample unto your descendents. But your words out of the dust shall exhort them where the voices of their shepherds shall turn to silence.
41 And the nations of the world will all be built upon the policy of getting gain and their wise men shall extol this policy as virtuous. They shall not be an ensample unto your descendents and their counsel shall be as unprofitable to their purpose as that of the shepherds of the church. But the wisdom of the Nem shall be their schoolmaster.
42 And the Lord shall bring your writings and your rememberings unto your children in latter days and this shall be the ensample for them. Yea, they shall take of your daily walk and daily talk and make of it an ensample of their own. And they shall begin once again to teach the pure and simple precepts of the High Place. This shall be the beginning of the Zion they shall establish in the land.
43 And behold, this shall be a sign unto they who the Lord shall call up out of your dust to bring again Zion, that the day has come to accept of Him that stewardship which He shall take from the Gentiles and return again unto the Children of Israel left in the land. 
44 The Lord shall have brought the Gentiles into this land and He shall have begun a great work among them, even a commencement of a great restoration. But they shall have rejected the greater portion of the fullness of the gospel which He shall have revealed unto them through His servant the prophet.
45 And behold, almost immediately upon their foundation, they shall have set aside the Zion of the Lord and taken up and embraced the Babylon of the world. Yea, they shall sin against the gospel and return altogether back unto all their golden calves and their idolatry. Yet shall they think they are the chosen and elect and they shall boast of it before all the nations. But their boasts shall be vanity.
46 For their shepherds shall cease to teach them that they should seek to stand personally in the presence of their Lord while yet in the flesh. Yea, they shall entirely misconstrue the teachings of the Temple and they shall teach that the ordinances bring salvation.
47 Behold, it is not the ordinances of salvation that bring salvation, for that is the office of the Lord through the Holy Ghost. Rather, the ordinances of salvation are those ceremonies and celebrations that teach salvation. But the shepherds of the church shall teach that salvation comes by and only through the performance of ordinances and that the ordinances may only be performed by the shepherds of the church. Wherefore, they shall teach that they are the ministers of salvation and they shall wear that doctrine upon their sleeves.
48 But this is not all, they shall insist that the ordinances are locked up with keys and that only the shepherds possess or may possess the keys to their performance. And they shall lock up the minds and the hearts of the people as a storehouse and they shall put the keys thereof into their pockets. For the people, because of the teachings of the shepherds, shall universally believe that they have no access to heaven because of the keys. And they are as if locked in a cell and must depend upon the shepherds for ordinances to save them. Yea, the shepherds of the church shall make of themselves masters, and they shall esteem all men as servants unto them.
49 And this shall be extolled as great wisdom and sound doctrine. Yea, this shall the people call restoration and the fullness of all things. Yea, this shall they call the fullness of the gospel and it is the ensign that they shall raise up in the last days unto all the world.
50 And the Gentiles shall pursue and drive the Remnant of Israel left in the land. And behold, they shall trample them under their feet. Their nations shall be utterly and completely undone, for they shall be subdued by the Gentiles. And the Gentiles shall set them in desolate places as their prisoners and the spoil. They shall not be allowed even so much as to pray or call upon the name of their Lord in their own language. So great shall be the oppression of the Gentiles and so heavy the yoke that they shall press upon your descendents.
51 But, when the Gentiles shall esteem that they have purged them enough so that they shall have been washed clean of all their traditions, or so they suppose, they shall lift the yolk somewhat from off them and they shall give them more liberty. The Gentiles shall set up governments within their midst in order that they might continue to control them, but the people shall once again begin to enjoy freedom to move about upon the land.
52 And the land shall call up to them as a familiar spirit and they shall feel pullings from their grandfathers. Yea, though their blood shall be mingled with the Gentiles, they shall begin to feel an urge and a great need to return again to the ways of their fathers, even Israel. But, being at liberty to move about, they shall have melted into the midst of the Gentiles and they shall no longer be in bondage. Wherefore, they shall quietly begin again to restore the things that were lost because of the Gentiles.
53 And behold, they shall do this partly by diligent study. But much of this restoration shall come directly from the Spirit through that faculty of the Holy Ghost that does bring all things to their remembrance. And behold, when the time is right and every needful thing is prepared, the Lord shall bring some few of them once again upon the Way and there reveal to them the records which you have dedicated unto them.
54 Then shall the restoration of all things begin again to break forth upon this land. For the Children of Lehi shall not set the teachings of these records aside as a thing of naught, as the Gentiles shall have done with that which the Lord shall have revealed unto them when He commenced the restoration among them. But the Children of Lehi, who shall be left in the land, shall take up your records and they shall use them quietly to bring again Zion.
55 And they shall build, little by little, settlements and villages created in the image of Nespelem and Elak Kowa and Potal, yea, and all the cities of the Nem. And how shall they do this? Is your writing so detailed that they might build up duplications of your cities? I say unto you, Nay. But that which you record shall be enough for them to learn Zion in their hearts. Then shall any place they build be equal to all that you have built. 
56 For it is Zion in their hearts that shall govern all that they build. Wherefore, can their little villages become ought else than Zion? Or can their great cities become Babylon if they have built Zion in their hearts? It is not possible.
57 But behold, they shall be persecuted for this great work. Yea, the shepherds of the church shall not support them but they will rail against them and condemn them for their desire to do that which they have deemed unprofitable.
58 But the profit shall be unto the Remnant. For, when the Gentiles shall have pushed the earth to the point of collapse, they shall be reduced to the rabble mob and all that shall have been deemed profitable to the Gentiles shall become their prey. Then shall the shepherds of the church regret the heel that they lifted before the Remnant. Then shall they regret the wagging head.
59 For Zion shall possess none of that which the mob shall esteem and they shall pass them by. But the shepherds of the church shall have taught the getting of gain and the laying up of riches. Yea, this shall be taught as doctrine and the church shall swell with it. Then shall the church become the prey of the wicked and the mindless, because of its riches.
60 Yea, this shall be a sign unto your descendents: The sun shall burn the stalk and many will leave the places of their inheritance because of the change in the seasons. And they shall flood into the cities of the Gentiles to find refuge. But the cities shall have no means to support them and will need to rely more and more upon a very few to produce provender for the throng. And great portions of the nation shall lay empty because the Gentiles shall have used up the good of the earth, to the end that, their collapse as a nation shall be as the collapse which you have witnessed in the Land of Hagoth. And even you have seen such a collapse in your own time in the Valley of Meninta. 
61 When all this shall repeat again in this land, the Lord shall bring out of darkness your records and your writings, and behold, the Remnant will take them up and shall use them as their standard. And they shall remove themselves from the rabble and set themselves alone in the wilderness. And they shall build up Zion in their hearts and establish Zion in the land. And all the world shall carry on around them devouring the good of that upon which they rely. Then shall Babylon fall and the Gentiles shall be left with their heaps of gold, but all their gold shall have no value over a loaf or a fish.
62 Yea, then shall the Gentiles remember that their prophets did prophesy of these very things, but their remembrance shall avail them nothing. Yea, they shall cite the scriptures and their writings, that their prophets warned them and they shall wonder how they might have been so deceived when the truth and the warning were given so plainly. But they shall not have Zion in their hearts. Wherefore, they shall wonder at their folly and not understand it.
63 But because of your records, Nem, the Remnant shall establish themselves in the waste places and they shall have nothing which the world esteems as worthy. But they shall also not be brought to collapse with the rest of the world, for their riches shall not be in the stuff of the world but in that which is truly of value unto the Lord. And their reliance shall not be upon the world, but they shall each produce according to their needs and yet a little more to provide for the beggar. And this shall set them in good stead in comparison to the Gentiles who shall run to and fro with their wealth in their hands and shall not be able to buy a morsel with it.
64 And because the Remnant shall not think themselves the masters of the earth, they shall tend her and take good care of her and she shall give abundantly. Yea, because the Remnant shall love the earth and esteem her above all riches, she shall reward them with abundance. And because they do not seek to use her up to get the gain thereof, they shall prosper and shall not want for anything.
65 Yea, there shall come a day when the Gentiles, who should have been the servants of the Lord and bring about a great restoration, shall cook the leather of their own shoes for food; the Remnant shall not be tormented with hunger because they esteem themselves to be part of the world and not the master of it.
66 For there is but one master and that is the Lord, the Peacemaker. And it is because that the Lord has given priesthood unto the children of men that they feel that they too are the earth’s masters. But do you not remember that, in giving man dominion over the earth, He also did command him to tend it and take good care of it? He did not make man the god of this earth. There is only one who makes that claim boldly in the face of men, and he is the adversary.
67 But men do claim to be sovereign in the stead of the Lord and in this they do justify much evil. See how that in times past, when your ancestors still dwelt in the Land Southward that the Nephites allowed not the Children of Ammon to join with them in their temple worship because of their differences. And this was done because of their belief that they were white and delightsome, and because of the pre-eminent priesthood. 
68 But neither the Lord nor His prophet made such distinction between the believers. Behold, He did inspire the prophet and give Him revelation, and the Ammonites were instructed of the Lord to make the covenants of the Temple in their own way. Wherefore, have the High Place today, and it is the center of the home.
69 But look at the state of things for the Nephites. Behold, there are but three left in all the land and they are left only because of the divine intervention that has affected a translation of our bodies. Yea, the Nephites are extinguished; for all that they saw their white skin as superior to their neighbors. Yea, they thought that the color of their skin was that which determined their worthiness. Behold, their white skin was no delight unto them when they went into oblivion because of the wickedness in their hearts.
70 Yea, the children of men do often justify their evils by use of the words of the Lord or of His prophets. The color of skin is no determinant and neither is the priesthood which God does give from time to time in order that His work and His purposes might be accomplished. Behold, how that Tucantor, although he possessed the priesthood of God and was raised unto the seat of high priest before the people of Mentina, nevertheless, he did divide the people and cause the destruction of that part of the nation. Was the priesthood a determinant of his worthiness? I say unto you, Nay.
71 And I say unto you, In the latter days, the Lord shall begin again a restoration through the Gentiles. And He shall choose the Gentiles because of that quality of their character that causes them to take up and pursue a project with great vigor. Yea, He shall use this quality to send His word which He gave unto the Nephites into all the world. And behold, they shall do this thing and it shall be accomplished in them according to the word and will of the Lord.
72 And He shall give them priesthood and His authority to do many things in His name. And the keys to this priesthood He shall devolve upon them. But they shall consider this the keys to the very kingdom of God and they shall teach that without these keys no door may be unlocked and no shackle may be loosed. And in but one generation from the commencement of that great restoration, they shall have corrupted the word of God and His will, and shall bind all men with that measure of priesthood they have been given. Yea, they shall make the performance of ordinances that which does assure salvation and they shall devolve their performances upon they who possess the priesthood.
73 Behold, this shall cause a great bondage to come upon the people and, when the time comes for them to receive greater truth and knowledge from the Lord, there shall be few who can walk upon the Way. Yea, when He desires a revelation to be given, behold, He shall be required to resort to intervention in order that His work might go forward. This is not much better than the state of things before the restoration that He shall make unto the Gentiles.
74 But they shall claim to possess His priesthood and that they are the masters of the earth, having dominion over her to do with her as they will. And each man shall count his stewardship as if it were some measure of dominion over his fellow men, and this shall be the means of much tribulation in the church. And behold, the shepherds of the church, yea, the high priests and the priests, the elders even down to the least of their teachers, shall in one voice declare and agree that none shall come unto salvation except by and through them, for the Lord shall have chosen them over all the earth and they shall esteem themselves the Elect of God because of that little priesthood which the Lord shall have given them as an help meet and as a schooling ground.
75 And where is there greater pride than this, that man shall extol his own virtue and call himself elect in all the world? Yet, in the day whereof I speak, there shall be hunger in their country. And behold, there shall be they among them who suffer with the cold and are destitute. And they shall judge them and give unto them a little, but in the main, they shall look upon the suffering of the people and esteem themselves the more blessed because of their riches. And they shall declare in their hearts that the poor are not as blessed because of sin. Behold, this is the pride of the Saints in the latter days.
76 And behold, they shall claim to have charity, but it shall be by extortion. And they shall claim to have the love of God, but it shall be meted out sparingly and upon conditions. It shall not be freely given, but shall be doled out by practice and by policy that does grind the face of the poor and bring about a division between them and the rich. They shall have not all things in common and all things shall be dictated unto them. Yea, they shall know nothing of the Common Consent. And this shall they call righteousness. Yea, because of this they shall call themselves the very Elect of God.
77 They shall love themselves and spare themselves no luxury. And for the poor they shall dole out unto the shepherds but a little here and a little there. And the shepherds shall exercise dominion over the poor and their lives shall they dictate, exhorting them to bend their backs so that they too might rise up in stature and in wealth, that they might walk among the elect. Is this the Law of the Tithe? Is this the Law of Consecration? You and I may decry such practices, but behold, they who call themselves elect in the latter days shall believe it to be so.
78 And even they shall teach that the one may be lived without the other. And this thing is part of that wherein they do sin against the gospel. Yea, they shall reject even the fullness of the gospel. And is this not according as the Lord prophesied unto the survivors of the overturning of all things in the Land Southward, and even unto your forefathers in Mentina? I say unto you, Yea. This is the thing which He foretold.
79 For the Lord does have all things before Him. Yea, He does see the beginning from the end and there is nothing that escapes His view. Wherefore He did promise they who were left of the seed of Lehi, who were left in the land, even the Remnant of them at that time, that He would take up again that which He had given into the hands of the Gentiles as a stewardship and return it unto the Children of Lehi who would be left in the land, a Remnant unto the House of Israel.
80 Behold, these are they who among your descendents shall take up the standard of the Lord and raise up a Zion once again in the land. These are they who, reading your writings, and also being touched by the spirit of this land, shall esteem the earth once again and teach the stewardship. They shall not lift up their faces unto the heavens and declare themselves to be the elect of God, but God shall elect them. Yea, they shall take up the things they shall read in these records and apply them unto their own lives. They shall judge the widow and visit the fatherless, and they shall do it without extortion and without motive.
81 And they shall not look upon their fellowman and judge him because of his color, or his manner of speaking, his beliefs, nor his lack of riches. No, there shall be no division among them, except that they shall not allow that men should cast themselves higher than their neighbor and they shall not suffer them to do any kind of hurt one to another.
82 And they shall be the Sons and Daughters of Levi and shall offer again a sacrifice in righteousness. And their priesthood shall be the commission of God, given personally. Wherefore, the orders of priesthood which they shall possess shall be esteemed of them as schoolmasters only, and a means whereby they may do great good unto the children of men. But they shall not esteem themselves wiser, greater, or any more elect than their neighbor because of the priesthood. And the Lord shall bring them upon the Way and instruct them.


83 And the people shall come unto Christ with all the intent of their hearts and they shall rejoice with Him upon the Way. And they shall live from revelation to revelation because they have not shunned prophecy and the Gifts of the Spirit.
84 And behold, the ordinances of salvation shall once again become the ensigns that they ought to be, and they who perform them shall have truly received the commission of the Lord. Wherefore, it shall be unto them as the Lord designed, for that which qualifies one to receive the priesthood is the desire to do the will of the Lord. And behold, the priesthood shall not become a dividing line between they who have and they who have not, and the people shall not puff themselves up because they have received authority, or so they suppose. But God shall justify them in their works because of the intents of their hearts, because they are good.
85 And thus shall the Lord commence again a great restoration in this holy land and it shall go forward even unto the culmination thereof. And the Lord shall fulfill His promise that He made unto the Children of Lehi in times past, that they shall have this land as an inheritance again and the stewardship of His kingdom.
86 And all this shall be restored unto the House of Israel because they take up His laws again and teach them unto their little ones. Yea, and their concentration shall turn away from the world and they shall delight in the Lord. For they shall walk with Him and talk with Him, and what worldly wealth can compare to this? What goods may they stuff into their storehouses and what gold and silver may they lay up in store that may buy the love of God?
87 Yea, they shall build and establish Zion again because they shall not set aside that which the Lord has commanded them and they shall not misinterpret that which He commanded their fathers. For they shall have the Second Comforter and the First, and is this to be despised? I say unto you, Nay. It is the best of the blessings and gifts of God.
CHAPTER 15
1 Behold, many years have passed away since Timothy came among the Nem of the Mountains in the days of my stewardship, and he has come back on many occasions since then. And the teaching of Timothy is a thing of great import unto us as a people. Wherefore, we do esteem his words to be great. And they are always in unison and they always have to do with the four great laws of the High Place.
2 And in that time, many new settlements and villages of the Nem have been formed, and also many cities and villages are no more. For, the Nem of the Plains and of the Lakes do find great reason to flee before the encroaching snows. Yea, the snows in the far north do come earlier and stay longer than in times past and the people of Corianton, although some few prefer to live upon the snow and ice the year round, most have all left that part of the country and have moved further south. And so it is in the Plains and also along the Coasts of the West Sea.
3 Yea, the ice does form earlier in the fall and stay longer and does not altogether break up in the spring as it was wont to do. Yea, and in the further north, there is no time for the crops to mature. Wherefore, we have had call to send the greater portion of our surplus great distances in order that relief might be given those Nem who have not been able to relocate quickly.
4 And behold, new lands have been exposed in the south, yea, even that great gulf in the south parts of the Land Northward have been exposed and are become dry land. Wherefore, there are now many settlements of Lamanites in that country and many Gadianton Robbers.
5 Yea, the face of the land does begin to change greatly in the Land Northward because of the cold in the north and because of the great heat in the south. But in the region we know as Nespelem, these changes have brought greater prosperity because we find ourselves in the middle. Behold, our winters have more snow, but they are shorter than in my father’s time. And our summers are somewhat hotter, but the duration of the hot season is also not so long. And the spring and the fall are longer and more pleasant, wherefore, our season of growth has improved somewhat.
6 And there have been reports of wars in the regions to the south round about the Land of Hagoth, or in other words, in that region where our father, Hagoth, first made his settlements. And in the cities of that region there is much unrest, for they are divided and have not all things in common.
7 And further, we do not hear as often from the peoples of other regions. Yea, our messengers are fewer and we are not as informed about the world as we have been in the past. I esteem the reason for this is due to the greater effort our people must employ in order to grow provender to send to those of our people who are still not removed from out of the far north country. And this occupies our minds exceedingly. But also there have been fewer travelers from other countries, and most especially this applies to visitors from across the West Sea.
8 Yea, and it is passing ten years since any messenger has come over the sea from the Nem of the Islands and we worry greatly what might be the cause of this great silence.
9 Now I, Shioni Akek, finish this my record. And I do hope that some good may come of the things which I have written. Yea, I do hope that they from among my own posterity who do read my words may find benefit in them.
10 Behold, Timothy has prophesied that a great restoration must come from out of our descendents, and this fills us with joy. But the knowledge of it also teaches us that there must first come about the reason for such a great restoration. This does cause us to turn again and review our own doing, for we do not desire that it might be any of our doing that brings upon the Nem any degree of apostasy.
11 But we are reconciled that at some point our people may turn from the path that we have chosen and because we cannot see all clearly, behold, we worry for our descendents. And we continue to teach our children carefully and to tend the earth mindfully. We do this in the hope that a falling away may not take place in our day. And behold, this is all that we can do. Amen.
________________