The Book 
of the Nem
Volume I
Another Testament of Jesus Christ 
from the Nem People
Accounts Written by the Hands of nem Prophets and Record keepers


The Book of the Nem is a sacred record of peoples in ancient America. It comprises over forty books, usually designated by the name of their principal author. Most of the records are handed down from father to son, from father to daughter, or from sibling to sibling. Within it are theaccounts of Hagoth and the People of Corianton, the son of Alma the younger, highlighting the time that Jesus Christ visited their people, teachings of the 3 Nephites, and follows the rise and fall of the Nem Zion from over a thousand years. 
When the Latter-Day Saints came into the Sanpete valley, they were met by Indigenous Americans who had been forewarned in dreams and visions of their coming and of their complete conquest of the region. Certain of the Chiefs of these Americans met with Brigham Young to give into his keeping a copy of the libraries hidden in the hills of the Wasatch Front, as part of their consecration to the United Order. They were pleased that the men of prophecy had come because this meant that their responsibility for the keeping of the ancient records had been fulfilled. President Young informed them, however, that they would have to remain in their stewardship for a little while longer. His words to them, “for we have not wherewith to translate these records.”
Shortly thereafter, the caretakers sealed the libraries up and no one was allowed to visit them except their brethren who came up periodically from the south. Over time, and as the indigenous population in the region was effectively extinguished, the records lay hidden and forgotten, but also unguarded. Because of the encroachment and desecration of parts of the library by treasure hunters and the like, the records and other notable artifacts connected with them, have been successfully removed and are now secure in safe places out of harm’s way. For generations, some of the Councils of Mayan Elders have sent emissaries to the libraries to make copies for translation purposes. In 1957, one such Council requested that the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints translate and publish the books of the library. They report that the Brethren of the Church with whom they met responded just as President Young had to the Chiefs of the Indians in Sanpete County – “We have no way of translating these things. No one speaks this language anymore.”
Past translations have been called the Mentina Archives, or the Sacred Record of the Nemenhah. The purpose of this record is to assist in the gathering of the House of Israel, to bring to light the words of Christ given to His “other sheep”, to prepare the Remnant of Joseph to rise up, and the Remnant of Jacob to return; that they may fulfill their covenants, build the New Jerusalem, and establish Zion in these last days before the return of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, in glory.
________________
Introduction
The Book of the Nem—also known as the Nemenha Record—is a sacred writing preserved by a covenant people of the House of Israel. It was guarded through many generations for this time, when the Lord would again move in power upon the earth and begin the great gathering spoken of by Isaiah and all the holy prophets.
This edition of the Nemenha Record is drawn from a sacred translation kept in trust by John the Revelator, also known as John the Beloved, one of the ancient preservers of sacred things. By divine commission, John maintained this translation to be delivered in the last days and placed into the hands of the Lord’s servants when the time appointed should arrive. The Nem testifies of John and of his foreordained role in the great work of the latter days, and his necessity in regulating and guiding the Church of God as the winding-up scenes commence.
This record is written to the Remnant—to those scattered of the tribe of Joseph, especially Ephraim and his companions, who would live in the day when the Lord sets His hand the second time to gather Israel from the four quarters of the earth. It also speaks to all people who have ears to hear and hearts to receive the whisperings of the Holy Ghost.
The Book of the Nem stands as another testament of Jesus Christ, a companion witness to the Book of Mormon. It is not canonized scripture of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, but may be regarded among the apocryphal writings preserved for a wise purpose in the Lord. Its truths can only be discerned through the power of the Holy Ghost, by whom all sacred things are made known.
This record teaches of the nature of God, the Elohim, the Godhead, the Holy Ghost, and the people of the Holy Ghost. It testifies of the great Jehovah, whose name is Jesus Christ, the Son of the Living God, and of His covenant relationship with His people. It preserves the teachings and ordinances that shaped a Zion society—principles of consecration, unity, and holiness.
The Nem Record is also a book of honor toward women, affirming their spiritual gifts, divine power, and essential role in Zion both anciently and in the last days.
The prophets of the Nem wrote that their record would be brought forth by the hand of a servant in a future day—a servant spoken of by Isaiah, who would labor to awaken the remnant, gather Israel, prepare a holy people, and point all souls to the Redeemer of the world. That day is now. This record comes forward in a time of marvel and wonder, under the direction of the Father and through the ministry of His Son.
Above all, the Book of the Nem exists to help the remnant of Joseph awake, arise, shake off the dust, remember who they are, and prepare for the great work appointed to them in the winding-up scenes of this world.
Those who read these words are invited to do so with the Spirit of God as their guide. For by the power of the Holy Ghost, every sincere seeker may know the truth of all things.
 

THE BOOK OF HAGOTH 
THE SON OF HAGMENI, 
THE BOON COMPANION OF CAPTAIN MORONI 
CHAPTER 1
1 Behold, I am Hagoth, and I am waxed old. I write this book so that my generations may be kept and so that the acts of my people may be recorded. I am that same Hagoth, the son of Hagmeni who was the boon companion of Moroni and followed him in war and peace. And it was my father who was a builder of walls and battlements who assisted Moroni in subduing the enemies of the Nephites and in securing our lands and our religion and our freedom. The same was my father, and he descended from that Zoram who took the eldest of the daughters of Ishmael to wife; and also from Jacob the brother of Nephi, whose father took his journey into the wilderness from Jerusalem when Zedekiah was king; and also from that Simeon who was a Priest of the Temple, who took his journey with Mulek when the Benjamites retreated from ruined Jerusalem, and also from that Mulek himself, who was son of Zedekiah the King. Wherefore behold, I am descended from Joseph, the same who was sold into Egypt, and from Aaron the brother of Moses, and also from Judah. 
2 Behold, I have seen much war and much peace. In the years of my life I have seen much prosperity and much poverty. I have governed my people when the Spirit strove with them and many received the Holy Ghost and prophesied, and I have governed when many people denied the faith. Wherefore, it seemed meet to my people that I should make an account of all of our doings. 
3 In the year that Moroni, that great captain of the Nephites died, behold, my father also died. For, he had received many wounds in the wars. But my father taught me in all manner of building and I became exceedingly accomplished in the building with wood. 
4 Now, it was also in that year that many of the Nephites began to see that those families who had not sent men into the wars to protect their liberties were filled with pride. For they were very rich because of their trade in the wars. Many could see the seeds of the downfall of our nation and they desired to go into the Land Northward. And there were others who saw that much of the country was wasted and yet the Lamanites persisted. Therefore, many desired to move, as our father Nephi moved, away from the threat. 
5 Wherefore, I built a ship, and it was after the pattern of the ship built by Nephi except that it was much larger. Into this ship went up many of the Nephites and from The Land Bountiful, by the Isthmus, they set sail into the West Sea. These Nephites sailed following the shore northward beyond the land Desolate and they went down out of the ship at the mouth of a great river. The place where they went down out of the ship was exceedingly barren, however, and the people sent the ship and a few trusty men back to the Land Bountiful for provisions. 
6 Now, I, Hagoth, being exceedingly concerned for our brethren and their families who had made the journey into the north by sea, I went to Shiblon to get the word of the Lord concerning them. Now Shiblon was also concerned, for many had also taken their journey northward by land. And he went to the Lord and inquired of Him. And the Lord commanded that I should send provisions unto the Nephites in the Land Northward both by the West Sea and by the East Sea. Yea, I did build a fleet of ships by which many of the Nephites and their families removed into the Land Northward and Shiblon commanded that copies be made of all the writings of our fathers and that they should be carried with those journeying into the Land Northward so that the people should not dwindle in unbelief. 
7 Now, the people who sailed to the Land Northward by way of the East Sea found a land of dense forests and much water and they did establish themselves somewhat in that land and a record is kept, I am told, of their doings. The people who journeyed into the Land Northward by way of the West Sea passed near unto the Land of Desolation and for many days found a land barren and unforgiving. And when they ran low of provisions, they stayed their journey at the mouth of a great river and sent my ship back for provisions. And I did send even more ships and more people into the Land Northward by that same route, for it seemed curious to me that so great a river should flow out of a barren country. And even I, myself, took my family and certain of the Lamanites of the People of Ammon, who had covenanted with Moroni to take up the sword no more against us, even they went with me into the Land Northward. 
8 And it came to pass that we kept the land in sight, lest we become lost in the sea and we came to a place where there was land on the right hand and land afar off on the left hand for many days, and we traveled between the shores until they came together at the mouth of the great river of which I had been told and of which I have spoken. 
9 Now, the water of the river was muddied as if it had traveled down from out of a mountainous place and where it emptied into the sea, it sullied the clear blue waters there. But there was an abundance of fish in this place, yea, even great marshal fish which provided much meat, and though the land was barren, some of our people desired to stay there because of the abundance of fish and other creatures of the sea that they could trade with our brethren in the Land Southward. Yea, the more part of them desired to stay and build a city, and they did establish themselves at the mouth of the river. 
10 But I desired not to live in a barren land, for I was a builder in wood and behold, in the place where the river emptied into the great bay, there was no wood. Therefore, I was desirous to know of the land from whence the river flowed, for the waters contained much earth and it seemed reasonable to me that the land from whence the waters flowed must be exceedingly rich, to nourish a river so. Therefore, I took those families that would follow me and we fashioned smaller boats after the fashion of the Lamanites, which were propelled by oars; for our large ships used the wind to propel them and they were as great birds of the sea, pushed along upon the winds; and we took much provisions and we took our journey upon the river to see where it would lead us. 
11 Therefore, I and twelve other of my brethren from among the Nephites and twelve of our brethren the Lamanites, took our families and our provisions and we made our expedition into the Land Northward. Behold, we traveled a long way and the land was for many days barren and we found few streams that emptied into the river. Wherefore, it continued, strange to us that so great a river should pass through such a dry land. Then we came to a place where the river had carved great canyons and precipices, even so much that the walls thereof surpassed by many times the height of the temples of the Nephites. Yea, so exceedingly tall were they in some places that even our strongest men could not climb to the tops thereof. 
12 Now, the journey through this part of the land became exceedingly strait, for we had thought to find a rich land with game and provision. But we could not ascertain the nature of the land because of the exceedingly steepness and the height of the precipice. Here and there we found places to land but they were sparing and we found no game and little provision. Yea, and the water was plentiful but, being muddy, it was of questionable worth to drink. Yea, our suffering was great, for we were unprepared and hasty. And it came to pass that our suffering became so great because of the heat that some of our people drank heavily of the water of the river and became exceedingly ill with fevers and with flux. For, the water was only sound for cooking and was unsafe to drink. Wherefore, when the women and children, when the food was gone and the water being at hand, did put forth their hands from the boats and drank of it freely from the river, then verily did they begin to suffer exceedingly, for the water was heavy and unfit to drink. 
13 Verily, when our suffering was the most acute, we put our boats in upon a small island of yellow sand and we turned them so that we could use them as a shelter from the sun, for the heat was great upon the river, and we cried unto the Lord and prepared ourselves for the inevitable end that we each knew was about to come upon us. Yea, so great was our suffering that we were all ready to give up the ghost, almost believing that there was no deliverance for us. 
14 And it came to pass that one of the young men had given all his water and provisions along the way to his companions. Therefore, the suffering for him was even more acute than for us, so much so that his mind was overcome and he went down to the water and opened the vein and laid himself in the water so that it would bleed out, whereby he might quickly free himself of so great a suffering. 
15 And verily, I heard a commotion from where I was, and I went down to the water to see, and behold, a great fish had taken hold of the young man by the arm and stopped the bleeding thereof. Now the fish was exceedingly large. Yea, the length of it even exceeded the length of one of our boats and the girth of it was equal to the breadth of one of our boats. Surely, the fish was so great that it could have taken the young man whole into its mouth. Nevertheless it took only the arm, and thrashed not. Wherefore, I took my sword and killed the fish and the young man was saved. But we were also all saved by this providence, for behold, in the fish was much meat and when we opened the entrails of the fish we found a great store of green stuff, the which was very useful for food and for medicine. Therefore, after preparing the meat and the contents of the fish, we began to recover from our suffering and we gave thanks to the Lord, lifting up our voices to Him for the miracle He had provided for us in the saving of our lives. Wherefore, did we learn a great lesson because even in our despair, or because of our despair, we did not forget our Lord nor deny Him even to the ending of our lives. Wherefore, He did open the heavens and saved our lives notwithstanding our despair was deep and our suffering was beyond our ability to bear. 
16 When we had prepared all of the fish and distributed it evenly among our people, each receiving their portion; for we esteemed each other equally and in order that pride and division not grow up among us, we had all things in common; we resumed our journey up the river. And the river was great and very powerful in places. Nevertheless, with great effort we made our way. 
17 And after the space of many days we left the great canyons and precipices and came into a land rich in every way. Yea, there were trees of all kinds near the sides of the rivers and plants for food and medicine in abundance. There were many smaller rivers and streams that emptied into the great river and each ruled its own valley into which other streams flowed. Behold, we had discovered a land of many rivers and mountains, a rich land, and our hearts were exceedingly glad. 
18 Behold, with us traveled two healers, who were gifted in their profession, and they discovered a curious thing. Yea, the one was called Cumenihah and the other Hemen, his brother, and they were accomplished in the finding out of the uses of plants. And they were Lamanites who had readily covenanted with Moroni to go no more to war against the Nephites. Therefore, they desired to leave the lands of their fathers and bind themselves to us, their new brethren, and travel with us to a new land. 
19 Now, in the land of our fathers there are many plants that are very good for food and there are many that are good for medicine. Behold, good food is usually good medicine, for, for this cause is it given unto man, to nourish the body and enliven the soul. But behold, those plants that are more specifically used for medicine are not used as food, for they are extremely powerful. Verily, they must be used with prudence and extreme caution. But these men found plants that are both good for food and for medicine, so that simply to eat our provision is at once nourishment and a ward against sickness. Therefore did the people confirm them as healers and teachers and they taught us all their profession. 
20 And it was ninety and three days from the time we left our brethren at the mouth of the great river and that was in the thirty and eighth year of the reign of the judges over the Nephites. Yea, we traveled up the great river ninety and three days and we came to a place where the river became wide and there were great fields of grass on both sides of the river. In this place the river made a great turning, whereas it had run somewhat into the east parts, it now turned again northward. At this great bending in the river we disembarked and built our settlement. And I, Hagoth, sent four of our young men back down the river to give our brethren word of our success and instructions for safely traveling through the canyons. For there was also much wood in the mountains and we were desirous to set up trade by shipping with those who settled at the mouth of the river, for there the land was barren and they had no wood. 
21 Now, the river was heavy with red earth, and the walls of the canyons through which we had traveled were red, wherefore, we called the river Akish, which being interpreted means “red earth”. And the city which the Nephites built was called Akish, after the name of the river. The city which we built the people called Hagothah after the manner of the Nephites, but to most it has been known as the city of Hagoth. This my people did to honor me, for I built the ships and the boats upon which we traveled to the Land Northward. 
22 And in not many years, we built many cities and set up much trade with the Nephites in the Land Southward. For each time that our ships and our boats went south with goods, they returned with goods and also much people. For the peace of the Land Southward was a variable thing and many came north into this land to escape strife. And we built many cities and the people were alike fruitful and industrious. And we enjoyed continual peace in the land, for we had no enemies and we were all alike in each others' eyes. 
23 Thus we did prosper in the Land Northward and as often as Shiblon sent word to us by any emissary, we did receive him with all honor and dignity. Likewise, when Helaman sent teachers to us to regulate our Churches, we did meekly receive them and they did ordain teachers and ministers unto us of our own brethren, and we enjoyed the blessings of the Church also. 
24 Notwithstanding our peace, we did often hear of unrest and strivings among the Nephites, and this because of their great pride and because of the secret combinations that were common among the more prideful and puffed up among them. For they took great store in their riches and greatly afflicted the meek and the humble among them. But our teachers, yea, and all the people together, strove diligently against this vice, and our system whereby we governed ourselves was of such a kind as to defeat those who attempted to rise up in stature and to subdue and enslave the poor. 
25 But verily, it might not have been so. For not long after we laid the foundation of the city of Hagoth, the people cried with one voice to make me their king, but I would not. Yea, the people wanted governance and a king, but I declared unto them my thoughts and beliefs. For I remembered the words of King Mosiah, that if it were possible that all men were righteous then it would follow that kings would always rule their people in righteousness. But Mosiah taught rightly that the people should choose judges, and in this shall the rights of the people always be protected. Now, we have seen how even those chosen by the people to be judges might become unjust if the people fall into wickedness. Wherefore, we chose and designated our wives as those who would elect the judges and that no action would be decided by one judge but by a council of judges. In this way, if the judges become unjust, it is only because the whole people have fallen into wickedness. For, our wives have always been more meek and more naturally prone to righteousness than our men. 
26 Verily, men have need of physical strength and will often become puffed up in that strength and use it to rule over others. But the mother's strength is in her children. Wherefore do they the more often choose according to that which is better for the little ones. This is wisdom, and because of this, we have seen less strife than the Nephites in the Land Southward. 
27 Now it came to pass that in the sixty and eighth year of the reign of the judges over the Nephites, many righteous Lamanites removed to the Land Northward and they carried news with them of the exceedingly wickedness of the Nephites in the Land Southward and of their lying and cheating, of their trampling of the commandments, their murdering of the Lord's anointed, and their abominations and priestcrafts. This thing greatly grieved my people. Therefore, because our people was made up of Nephites and Lamanites equally, we were desirous to refer to ourselves in a manner which would not bring division among our people. For, in all things we wished to avoid the errors made by the Nephites in the Land Southward. 
28 Wherefore, Hemen, the now-aged healer, suggested that we call ourselves Nem, which in the language of his people means, "The People", and the people agreed. Wherefore, we had no more Nephites, neither Lamanites, nor Mulekites, Ammonites, or any manner of “-ites.” We called ourselves Nem, The People, from that time forth, for we were one people, not many. 
29 And we became an exceedingly numerous people and an exceedingly happy people. And the Nephites became a wicked and loathsome people in the Land Southward, yet the Lamanites in the Land Southward became more righteous. And we, being not willing that the secret combinations come among our people, began to trade only with the Lamanites in the south. Nevertheless, because migrant Nephites had established themselves in other parts of the Land Northward, these secrets were also published among us because of our trade with them. But we strove diligently to root out this evil among us. And Nephi, even the son of Helaman, came often among us and showed us how the Lamanites had wiped out from among them the Gadiantons by preaching the gospel among them. Therefore, he did ordain teachers from among us and taught them. Verily, these did hunt out the beginnings of robbers and combinations among us and, at great peril to themselves and their families, they preached unto them the gospel and converted many. And in this way we did maintain peace and prosperity even though it seemed that bloodshed and war reigned all around us. 
30 Now among those who were called to teach these robbers were two of my sons, Hagmeni and Ameliki. Yea, my two eldest sons became teachers unto the rebellious among our people. And Nephi did lay hands on them and did prophecy over them, and these are the words he did prophecy over them when he laid hands on them to confer on them the authority to minister in the Lord's name and in His place, and to ordain them to be teachers: 
31 Behold, Hagmeni, son of Hagoth! I, having authority of Jesus Christ, lay my hands upon your head, in accordance with the ordinance of the priesthood, and I confer upon you the Priesthood of the Most High God after the Order of the Son of God, the which has been transmitted to us from father to son even down to Alma, who received it from God. And I ordain you unto this office in that order. Therefore, you shall teach, preach, expound and exhort all men to repent and be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, and observe to keep the commandments of God. And in His name, if you do this, being guided by the Holy Ghost, you shall speak as if with the voice of the Lord, for His power shall be with you. And relying not on the arm of the flesh but on the Lord in all things, you shall be protected in your labors. Behold, your wife and your children shall also be blessed and prospered, and they shall suffer no hardships because of your calling, but the Lord will be with them always. 
32 Behold, Ameliki, son of Hagoth! By the authority given me of Jesus Christ and in His name, I lay my hands on your head, in accordance with the administration of my calling in the priesthood which I have received by like manner, to confer upon you the Priesthood of the Most High God after the Order of the Son of God. Wherefore, you are ordained unto a high calling, to seek out and teach those who have rebelled against the Lord. To them shall you cry repentance and teach them the true ordinances of God, and if you do this, you shall have the voice and power of the Lord. Yea, and you shall be protected and your family shall be prospered because of your work. Go now, therefore, among the more wicked part of the dissenters and speak as the Spirit directs. 
33 And many more were ordained under the hand of Nephi and he spoke as if with the voice of God and prophesied. And Nephi was a righteous man and strong in the gifts of God. Wherefore, all the teachers went and fulfilled the words of Nephi and converted the more wicked parts of those robbers who were among us. Then it became very difficult for the rebels to maintain their combinations in our land and they left and went into the east and south borders and began to build their combinations among our neighbors. 
34 Yea, the words of Nephi were all fulfilled every whit. Our teachers were protected by the power of the Spirit and none could prevail against them. And none of their wives or families suffered any harm from those robbers in the land. Yea, the teachers went out with such confidence in the Lord that our land was completely rid of the Gadiantons because of the word of God. 
35 Now when all this was accomplished, Nephi set Hagmeni apart as a High Priest unto our people. Then Nephi prepared to return into the Land Southward to preach the word of God to the Nephites. And we tried to prevail upon him to stay with us. For behold, the robbers had taken control of the government there. But he could not be convinced and departed into the Land Southward. And it was in the sixty and ninth year of the reign of the judges over the Nephites that Nephi departed from us to declare repentance unto the Nephites in Zarahemla. 
36 Behold, because of the diligence of Hagmeni and the regulation he made of the Church, we had continual peace in our land for many years. But behold, in all the lands of our neighbors in the east and in the south, the Gadiantons gained control of the governance and we began to worry exceedingly. Wherefore, in the seventy and fifth year of the reign of the judges, or as we began to reckon, in the sixth year, our people decided to move ourselves into the fast places in the mountains. For we feared exceedingly the strength of the robbers that surrounded us. 
37 Wherefore, we divided our people into two groups, the one led by me and the other by Hemen who was a great leader and a healer. And I took those who would follow me and we took our journey into the north and west and Hemen took those who would follow him and they followed the river Akish afar into the north. And, behold the Nem who followed Hemen were an exceedingly great body of people and they found herds of cattle on vast plains of grass and these herds provided great provisions for so large a body of people and we had much trade with them. 
38 But behold, the Nem who followed me were not as numerous, for we were builders and loved the mountains. Yea, we liked not continually to move but preferred to establish ourselves in one place. Wherefore, we found a valley that abounded in game and had much water and timber, and we built us a city there. And it was amidst the mountains west and north of the river Akish and between our mountain fastness and the fair land which we had left was a wasteland of exceedingly barrenness. Now this was wisdom in us, for the bands of robbers did nothing but for gain and to traverse the barrens would have been too costly for them. Therefore, we did use them as a natural frontier and a bulwark against them. 
39 And the valley in which we established ourselves we called Meninta, for there was much salt in the southern part of the valley. And the land of Meninta was indeed a fastness for the Nem, for it could only be approached from the south by way of a narrow canyon, and from the west by a narrow canyon, and from the north through an exceedingly narrow defile. Wherefore, we established ourselves in a place that was easily defended and we built a beautiful city. 
40 Now the Gadiantons ceased to take notice of us for we traded not into the south but maintained commerce only to the north with our brethren. For we opened and maintained roads and trails into the Land Northward following the mountains that extended exceedingly far into the north. Wherefore, we had good trade routes to the north that led out onto the plains and we maintained good concourse with our brethren in the north. But we closed all roads to the Land Southward, for we desired no contact with the Gadiantons. 
41 Behold, as I said, I am Hagoth and I am waxed old. I have both ruled the Nem and been ruled by them since I left the Land Southward when Shiblon was Chief Judge of the Nephites. And, behold, we have done good to all people and the Lord has blessed us exceedingly. Where the Nephites have fallen into wickedness, we have escaped and avoided rebellion. 
42 All this I attribute to the wisdom of Shiblon, for had he not provided copies of the plates of scriptures for us when we removed unto this land, we would have fallen into unbelief. And I also attribute our great success to the ministrations of Nephi unto the Nem, for he taught us to rely on the word of the Lord. Blessed be the Lord our God, for He has provided a refuge and a sanctuary for us. 
43 And now behold, I am grown old and halt, and I must soon give up the ghost. Therefore, I yield up these plates to my son, Hagmeni, who has become a man of great stature, both in the spirit and in wisdom.
________________




THE FIRST BOOK OF SHI-TUGO
FORMER WARRIOR, AMMONITE RECORD KEEPER 
- THE WAYS AND CUSTOMS OF THE AMMONITES -


CHAPTER 1 
1 Behold, I am Shi-Tugo, the same who went up to war with all my kin against the Nephites when that great captain Moroni led them to victory against us. I call Moroni great not only because he led the Nephites to victory over us, their enemies, but because he also did show mercy and great wisdom in his treatment of his enemy whom he had beaten. 
2 For he did show mercy and provided a means whereby peace could be established once again in the land. And in this he did show much wisdom because we, the Lamanites, all believed that the Nephites were very full of wickedness, and most especially their leaders. 
3 But behold, he did extend unto us even that we might covenant to peace and live among the Nephites. Now, this was contrary to all that we had been taught. And this brought the war to an end, and many of us did join with the Nephites. 
4 And I went with my people into the land of the Nephites and took up an inheritance among the people who called themselves Ammonites. And we did begin to till the earth. And behold, my people did become highly esteemed among them because that many of them were also healers. 
5 Behold, the Ammonites are the people in the lands governed by the Nephites who took us in as if we were their own kin. Verily, all the Lamanites who covenanted not to take up the sword again, when Moroni had offered us our lives, did either return to their homes in peace, or they did travel into the Nephite country and the Ammonites welcomed us. 
6 Wherefore, the Ammonites are my people and kin. Their ways are my ways and their customs have I taken unto myself. And it has been said that the Ammonites are the most righteous people among the Nephites. I believe this to be true. For, among all the armies of the Nephites that ever came against the Lamanites in battle, only the Sons of Helaman fought to victory sustaining many wounds, but behold, none died from them. Behold, these young men fasted and prayed, yea, and even sang hymns of thanksgiving while in the heat of battle. Behold, is this not faith? 
7 Wherefore, I find the ceremonies and customs of the Ammonites to be most compelling and do make a record concerning them. 
MARRIAGE 
8 And this is the manner in which the Ammonites do govern themselves. Every man abides in the house of one woman and they are married by and through a sacred ordinance that binds them together. 
9 And when a man wishes to be joined to a woman, he goes unto her mother and asks her advice as to how he might win the favor of her daughter, his desire. If the man meets with her approval, she shows him the gifts he must bring and the tokens most likely to make an impression upon her daughter. Then she arranges many opportunities for the young man and young woman to be together. 
10 Then the man goes unto her father and asks his advice how he might win her. Behold, the father tells him of how he won the love of her mother. 
11 When the man has won her love, they go again unto her mother to declare it and to arrange their union. Her mother calls the father and all his brethren together to discuss and plan the man’s preparation for marriage. She reminds the old men of the particular necessities of a young woman so that the men are brought to a remembrance of the happy times of their youth. 
12 This is wisdom, for a marriage is a happy time for the man and the woman most sure. But the joy is also extended to everyone in the community, for all are brought into the preparation for the wedding feast and also for the ceremony of the sealing. 
13 When the bride’s mother has met in council with the men, and she is satisfied that they are reminded of the bride, the men honor her in a ceremonial way. If a member of the family is also a Peli, he performs the ceremony. If no member of the family is a Peli, a request is made of the Peli Council for one of their number to become a ceremonial uncle to the groom, and he performs the ceremony. In this way the community cares for one another. 
14 And this is the manner in which the ceremony is performed. The mother of the bride is escorted to the center of the council circle and she sits there. Then all the men are seated in a circle around her. In this arrangement, and when all are seated, they sing a song of praise in a sacred manner. They all clap their hands together three times and sing a joyful, thanksgiving song. 
15 When they have finished singing, the Peli fills a bowl with sacred odors and strikes fire to it so that the holy incense rises up and covers the whole council. 
16 He prays to the Father, lifting his voice up to the sky and gives thanks for all the blessings of life and the creation. When he has done this all the council clap their hands three times and they express their agreement. 
17 He prays to the Mother, touching the bowl on the head of the mother of the bride, and gives thanks for the blessings of the earth and all the fruits of it. When he does this, all the council clap their hands three times and express their agreement. 
18 He prays to the West, lifting the bowl in that direction, and he gives thanks for the good counsel and teachings of the mother of the bride. When he does this, all the council clap their hands three times and express their agreement. 
19 He prays to the North, lifting the bowl in that direction, and he gives thanks for the spirit of truth the bride has received from her mother. When he does this, all the council clap their hands three times and they express their agreement. 
20 He prays to the East, lifting up the bowl in that direction, and he gives thanks for the knowledge and the wisdom of the grandfathers that the mother of the bride has used in raising her daughter. When he does this, all the council clap their hands three times and express their agreement. 
21 He prays to the South, lifting up the bowl in that direction, and he gives thanks for the good and provident practices that the bride’s mother has taught her. When he does this, all the council clap their hands three times and express their agreement. 
22 When this ceremony has been finished, the members of the council each stand and heap praises and gifts upon the bride’s mother, and all the gifts are of such a kind as to be appropriate to be added to the beautiful garment that the bride will wear at the wedding. 
23 When all have made an end of speaking and of giving of gifts, the bride’s mother praises the greatness of the gift the council has made for her poor daughter and how happy she will be at the wedding because of the generosity of all her relations. 
24 In this way, all of the relations of the bride join together in providing for the bride and her upcoming wedding. They also join together in prayer and thanksgiving. This custom teaches the people to take joy in the blessings the Lord abundantly bestows upon them that believe on Him, and to acknowledge His hand in all things. 
25 Now, after the whole council has made this ceremony for the mother of the bride, the men of the family take the groom, who is soon to become one of them, and they perform a ceremony together. In it the men demonstrate that they are willing to esteem the young man as their own relation. This is the manner of the ceremony: 
26 The groom is escorted to the center of the council circle and the bride’s brothers form a circle around him. The bride’s father and his brothers form a circle around them. The sons of the uncles form a circle around them, and so forth, until all the male relations of the bride encircle the groom. 
27 When all the relations are seated around the groom, he also sits and they sing a song of thanksgiving together. Having sung their thanks, the Peli fills a bowl with sacred odors and strikes fire to it so that the incense rises and fills the room, just as the voices of all had filled the room with joy and prayers of thanks. 
28 He raises the bowl and offers it to the Father, giving thanks for the blessings of creation. When he does this, all the council clap their hands and express their agreement. 
29 He raises the bowl and offers it to the mother touching the bowl upon the ground in front of the groom, and gives thanks for the blessings of health and of the fruits of labor. He gives thanks for the beauty and strength of the groom. When he does this, all the council clap their hands three times and express their agreement. 
30 The Peli raises the bowl to the West and gives thanks for all the good counsel the groom’s mother has given him. When he does this, all the council clap their hands and express their agreement. 
31 The Peli raises the bowl to the North and gives thanks for the spirit of truth the groom has received from his mother. When he does this, all the council clap their hands three times and express their agreement. 
32 The Peli raises the bowl to the East and gives thanks for the knowledge and wisdom of the grandfathers he has received from his mother. When he does this, all the council clap their hands three times and express their agreement. 
33 The Peli raises the bowl to the South and gives thanks for all the good and provident practices the groom has received from his mother. When he does this, all the council clap their hands three times and express their agreement. 
34 When this ceremony has been completed, each of the groom’s new brethren stand up and courteously praise the groom’s mother. They also praise the bride and give advice for the happiness of the new family, and they give gifts to the groom. Now, the gifts they give to the groom are all those kinds of gifts that will ensure the health, prosperity and safety of the new family. 
35 When all have made an end of speaking and of giving gifts to the groom, he stands and courteously praises the bride’s mother and all of his new relations for the greatness of the gifts he has received from his new relations. 
36 Then the brothers and the father of the bride take the groom and they all perform a purification of the body in the manner of the Ammonites. And this is the sacred manner in which they do purify the groom and prepare him for the wedding: 
37 The brothers of the bride, or some others who stand for her, take the groom and he is stripped of all clothing except for a loin cloth. Then they gather in fuel for a fire. It is in this fire that forty-nine stones will be heated. 
38 The groom is stripped of everything of his own. He is washed with clean water and then he is rubbed with oil. This is to signify that because he has chosen the Lord’s path and the Lord’s way of marriage, he may be washed clean of the blood and sin of this generation. He is anointed with oil upon the head, the breast, the loin, the belly and upon both knees. This signifies that he is set apart as a new creation and that all his parts are anointed unto God. 
39 When the groom has been washed and anointed, one of the brothers paints a switch of a stem with red color mixed with oil and with it he ceremonially beats the groom so that the groom’s body is painted with stripes. This signifies the stripes which Christ shall receive, and by them we shall be healed. 
40 Then the groom is clothed in a blanket that was previously provided by the mother of the bride. This is to signify the new position the groom has gained in the family of his bride. That he brings only his body and his stripes to the family, and yet, he is esteemed as one of them, is a most significant and meaningful performance for the groom. The blanket also represents outward or worldly needs. All people have claim upon their family and the community for such things, just as the needy have claim upon him for such wants. 
41 When the young men have brought all the fuel, the bride’s father builds the fire with the stones in a sacred manner. 
42 During that time when the young men are occupied gathering fuel, the Peli enters the sweat lodge and seats himself in the west. He prays earnestly for the groom. He fills a bowl with sacred odors and raises it to the sacred directions, acknowledging God’s hand in all things. Having prepared the lodge in this way, he comes out and directs the rest of the preparation. 
43 He purifies all the participants with the incense and leads them in prayer and song. Then they all enter the lodge and perform the ceremony of purification. 
44 Now, the mother of the bride gathers the women kin and they prepare the bride in a similar manner. They wash her and anoint her, and, taking the gifts given at the council, they work together in preparing the bride’s beautiful garment. During this time they pray and sing in a sacred manner and the women teach the bride all those things that will help her in her new position in the community. For, she will soon become a mother among her kin, a position of great responsibility. 
45 These ceremonies differ from those of the Nephites, for the people of Ammon had no temple in the land they were given as their inheritance. And behold, the distance to the nearest temple was very great. Wherefore, the prophets of the Nephites did encourage the Ammonites to adopt the message and substance of the temple ordinances and worship into their ceremonial lives. So did the prophets from Alma’s days down to the present. And Shiblon, even in the day that I record my observation, does see the wisdom of this practice. 
46 But the Ammonites gain greater blessing than do the Nephites, for they are continually in prayer all the day long. Yea, and all of their celebrations call their attention unto God. All their comings and all their goings, indeed, all of their doings are dedicated to the Lord and their thanks unto Him are always upon their lips. 


CHAPTER 2 
1 The preparations having been completed, whereby the bride and the groom are made ready, the bride’s father brings the Peli to speak to the couple together. And they three are shut up alone for several hours. During this time the Peli recites to them the history of the creation and teaches them about the atonement. 
2 And the bride and the groom each covenant with God to keep four sacred laws. They are the Law of the Gospel, the Law of Sacrifice, the Law of Chastity and the Law of Consecration. They each covenant separately to keep these laws, and then they covenant with each other to do it. 
3 The Peli places on them clothing, after the manner of Husbands and Wives, and teaches them the sacred manner of their making. Then they sing a song of thanksgiving together. And behold, many things are spoken unto them that cannot be written. 
4 When the Peli has finished speaking, the bride retires to a separate room and the women kin dress her in the beautiful garment. Now, this garment is made in the sacred manner, and after the pattern of the garment that the Peli had placed upon the bride and the groom, and it is decorated beautifully. 
5 When the bride and all the women rejoin the groom and the Peli, he escorts them all to a place where all their kin are seated, both of the bride and of the groom. 
6 Then are they man and wife and all the people clap their hands three times and cry out their agreement in a song of thanksgiving. It is then the custom for all the people to give gifts to the new couple. 
7 When the gifts are all given, tables are set and a great feast is brought out before the assembled multitude. But before anyone may eat, the father and mother rise and courteously praise the mother of the groom. Then all are invited to celebrate the marriage and join in the marriage feast. 
8 In this sacred manner do all the community celebrate the marriage of a man and a woman, and it is most peculiar indeed, for the great deference given to the mothers of the bride and of the groom. Yea, all that is good, gentle, kind, industrious, providential, wise, in fine, all things and gifts which do show a good countenance, and character are attributed to the mother. In this sacred manner do they give praise, honor, and gratitude to the Mother of all Living. 


CHAPTER 3 
THE BLESSING OF CHILDREN 
1 Behold, when a man and a woman have married themselves and their community in this sacred manner, they proceed to build a home together, even they together, and all their kin. And this dwelling place is modest and humble. 
2 And when a child is born, behold, they wash it and dress it in beautiful raiment and bring it to the Peli. And while the mother holds the child, the Peli places the hands of the father upon it. Yea, and he also places the hands of all the kin of the couple who have been asked to participate, upon the child. Then the Peli sings a song of thanksgiving. Then the father of the child speaks the name of the child in a clear voice and, when the Spirit is upon him, he does prophecy concerning the infant. 
3 When he has finished speaking, the Peli once again sings a song of thanksgiving and takes the child in his hands and raises it up before all the people and again pronounces its name to them. All the people clap their hands three times and say the name in a loud voice together. Once this is done, the child is given back to the mother again. 
4 This is the sacred manner in which a new child is introduced to the community and to the world. Yea, and this is the sacred manner in which the child receives its name in the sight of all the people. And all things are done in the holy name of God and in a spirit of thanksgiving. 
5 And the name of the child is written in the book kept by the Peli. 


CHAPTER 4 
AGE OF AGENCY 
1 Behold, it is the custom among the people of Ammon that all children are taught at home by their mother and their father. Yea, the mother and father of every child are responsible for teaching them to talk in a sacred manner and to walk in a sacred manner. And, notwithstanding the fact that many children do begin the study of trades even at a young age, nevertheless, they first learn to walk by faith and to speak peaceable things from the parents. 
2 And the child is nurtured with all love and care so that there can be no doubt at all in the mind of the child of the position of importance in which the parents hold them. Because of this confidence, the loyalty of the children for their parents is very great. Yea, and they do speak with reverence and respect and they do not fight and quarrel one with another, because they esteem their neighbor as importantly as they do esteem themselves. 
3 Now, when a young man or young woman approach the age of agency, whereby they are made accountable for their actions as any man or woman is made accountable, they are honored with a holy ordinance. And this is the manner of the ordinance: 
4 The youth is brought before all their relations and friends and is placed in the center of the meeting place. And all the relations and friends sit themselves in circles around the youth, beginning with the parents and the brethren and sisters, and then the relations as they extend out from them, until all the relations are seated. The friends stand all around the outside. 
5 And when all are in their places, the Peli stand and form a circle around where the youth is seated. And behold, they raise up their hands above their heads and clap them loudly together three times. When they have done this, all the people speak the name of the youth clearly, and they also clap their hands three times. 
6 When this is done, the Peli stand one at a time and each speaks some good thing about the youth. 
7 Then, every person who wishes to do so, stands up one at a time and courteously complements the mother of the youth. And after each person has spoken, the whole congregation claps their hands together three times. 
8 And when all are done speaking, the brothers and sisters, and the cousins of the honored youth stand and go out to the outer court where the relations of the youth have laid down the gifts they have brought. And they bring in the gifts and heap them upon the seated youth. 
9 Now, though it is not required by the ordinance, it has nevertheless become the custom that the youth now stands and honors certain important people by giving away some of the gifts, and this also honors all the givers of gifts. 
10 At this time, when all has been accomplished, the father, or designated Peli of the youth, raises an incense of sacred herbs in the sacred directions all around the youth and sings a song of thanksgiving in the hearing of all the people. And when he has finished his song, the people raise their voices also and repeat the song, only adding the name of the youth at the end of it in a most tumultuous unison. 
11 Having completed the ordinance, all the people proceed to a feast prepared by the mother, sisters and aunts of the youth and they share the good things together in honor of the passage of the youth into manhood or womanhood. 
12 Now, as I said, the name of the youth is used in this ordinance, and the name is the same that was given by a sacred ordinance when they were born. But, when they reach the age of agency, and this is that age when a young man must work for his support and when a young woman begins upon the years of childbearing, they receive a new name in a sacred ceremony. And this is the manner of the ordinance of naming: 
13 When the Spirit shall have testified to the youth of the rightness of the time, they present themselves before the principle Peli and they speak together for a long time. Yea, sometimes they meet together many times over many days. 
14 After they have spoken, the Peli seeks the guidance of the Spirit and the New Name is revealed to him by the Holy Ghost. 
15 Having received the New Name by the workings of the Spirit upon the Way, the Peli and the youth meet again and it is given in a sacred ordinance. And this is the manner of this sacred ordinance: 
16 The Peli arranges the Sacred Place so that the altar blanket is stretched out from east to west. He prepares a place for the youth to sit on the west side of the altar blanket. He also prepares a place for himself to sit on the east side of the altar blanket. 
17 The Peli then prepares an incense of sacred herbs and presents the smoke of it as an offering to the sacred directions, all the while singing a song of thanksgiving. 
18 When he has finished, he gives the incense to the one receiving the New Name and the same song is sung by both of them. 
19 When they have finished singing, the Peli claps his hands three times and declares to the youth all that the Spirit has revealed to him. Having finished prophesying, the Peli pronounces the name and the youth repeats it. 
20 Now, this is not the name by which the youth is known among the people, but is held in sacred reserve and is used as a keyword upon the Way. Yea, the youth reveals the New Name only in a certain place upon the Way. 
 
CHAPTER 5 
1 Behold, the Ammonite people are a happy and delightsome people, walking uprightly before the Lord in all things. Yea, they did rejoice in the Lord in all things. Rather than fail to acknowledge the Lord’s hand in all things, they did raise the hands and sing and dance in rejoicing and praise at every instance or occasion. Yea, I observed them in their homes and they did lift up their voices to the Lord. And also I did observe them in their shops and their conversation was ever filled with praise and honor to the Lord. And I did work with them in their fields, and again, their discourse was one of courtesy toward one another and praise toward their God. Would I that such things might be seen among the Nephites. 
2 Yea, so oft were the people of Ammon want to break into the praise of their Lord that the Nephites were often of two minds concerning them. Either they wondered at them for their spiritual excess and praised them, or they distrusted them, thinking their constant praise of God but feigned and a counterfeit. This caused some division in feeling toward them, some Nephites being drawn by the power of their customs, and others being repulsed by them. 
3 But behold, I testify to you that these customs, celebrations, ceremonies and ordinances of the Ammonites are good and righteous, notwithstanding they be different somewhat than the ways of the more sober Nephites. For, I have lived among both the Nephites and the Ammonites and I see the truth in the ways and customs of both. 
4 And there is no wrong in that the Nephites and the Ammonites both worship the same God, yet in different manner. Yea, the Nephites worship in a spirit of stately and formal reverence, even as the fathers did before them. And this thing is good and brings about much good among them, yea, and the Lord is with them and does bless them. And the Ammonites does He also approve and bless, though they worship in a tumultuous, spiritual abandon. 
5 Wherefore, judge not either people right or wrong because they worship differently, but search out the motive and intent of a thing. For, I believe that all things that create good must be inspired of the Spirit that fills the Universe and moves upon all matter for good. 
6 And would it not be very like unto the denial of the Spirit to declare my works for good an evil thing because they be different than yours? Be instructed by the Spirit then, and judge not good for evil and evil for good. 
7 For such judgment is not sound, but is more like to pride than to wisdom. And if man’s judgment turns to pride, then it were far better that men refrain and leave off judgment altogether. For pride is but vanity and if judgment turn to pride, then wisdom is become vanity also. 
8 But that which is sown and yields well must be adjudged good and some is kept back to be sown again. Behold, this is held by all husbandmen to be a wise practice, and none there be that contend with it because the fruit derived from its exercise is proof ample enough to impeach all argument. Even so the smith does temper the iron, for experience has proven that the sword so tempered keeps its edge in battle. 
9 Howbeit, the youth upon whom the village heaps gifts just because he has reached an age when he must begin to earn his own keep, yea, and for no great occasion, is so moved upon by the custom that he turns again and gives back much of what he received? Some look upon this custom as folly. But I say it is not so. For, here is a youth who, as a man, will look differently upon riches than his fellow in Zarahemla who, lacking such a wanton custom, learns to esteem riches above all things. And here is a youth who learns to honor the giving as much as the getting. Yea, here is a youth who, seeing poverty and want, will readily and freely give of his substance and think nothing of the loss to himself. 
10 And again, shall the young woman who, as a young bride, is so accepted and lavished by her village, ever turn her face from the refugee? 
11 Behold, the customs of the Ammonites, though they be different from those of their neighbors and benefactors the Nephites, do bring to pass great good and much righteousness. Wherefore, it is because of this that I dedicate myself to the recording of all their customs. For I believe that these customs will someday be the salvation of all the people. 


CHAPTER 6 
BAPTISM 
1 And now I resume my observations of the customs of the Ammonites. 
2 Behold, the people of Ammon believe on Jesus Christ, whom the prophets say must come, even that Son of God who shall redeem His people Israel, and they believe in baptism, even the baptism taught to them by Ammon. 
3 Whenever they baptize in the name of Jesus Christ, this is the manner in which they do it: 
4 The father of the person to be baptized calls upon the Peli, for the Peli are Levites either by birth and thereby legal right, or by adoption, and have received the authority to baptize by the Spirit under the hands of the Lord’s anointed. Yea, the father or patron of the person to be baptized arranges matters with the Peli, for it is his office. 
5 Then the person who wishes to be baptized goes down into the water with the Peli and both of them raise their hands above their heads and clap them together three times, and speak the person’s name clearly. 
6 Then the Peli clearly declares his right and authority to speak and act for and in behalf of the Christ who will come. He then declares to all creation that he baptizes the person in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. 
7 When he has said these things, he submerges the person in the water so that every bit of him is under the water and no part of him is exposed to the air. Then he quickly raises the person up again and all present clap their hands. 
8 Thus, the person begins a new life and a new covenant, and the covenant is sealed upon him by that Holy Spirit of Promise because of that covenant made by the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost before the world was. 


CHAPTER 7 
PURIFICATION 
1 Now, the Peli stand among the Ammonites who are healers and they are also they who administer the ordinances of salvation unto the people of Ammon, having received their commission and ordination from the Lord through His anointed. Wherefore, they are called of God as was Aaron, even by the gift of prophecy. 
2 And they become the sons of Aaron and of Levi by the ancient ordinance of adoption. But behold, many are there among us who can trace their generations even back to father Aaron himself. Wherefore, the people of Ammon take their position in the house and kingdom of God very seriously. 
3 Notwithstanding, their fathers took an oath that they would never more shed any blood at all. Wherefore, during that generation, a new kind of sacrifice was instituted among them whereby each man offers up a personal sacrifice unto the Lord. But behold, they did not offer the first fruits or the firstlings of the flock, as their forefathers did, or even as the Nephites do to this day. But rather, they did offer their own bodies as an atonement sacrifice, and this is the sacred manner in which they did offer themselves. 
4 The Peli prepare a sacred place that is in the shape of the sphere in which we live. Yea, behold, they dig a pit wherein several men might sit, or, in other words, large enough for several men to sit in a circle facing the center thereof. This pit is the place of the fire and represents the creation. 
5 The Peli also prepare a rounded tabernacle the same size as the pit that they have prepared. This tabernacle is built of branches and strips of cloth, and is covered with thick carpets and the skins of cattle. The frame of the tabernacle represents the firmament of the Earth and the covering represents the firmament of heaven. 
6 Now, at the center of the tabernacle, the Peli dig a hearth and the earth they take out they cast up in a straight line leading from the door of the tabernacle, which faces east, about ten paces, and there they cast up a small mound. This is the altar of sacrifice and the mounded earth represents the strait and narrow path that leads from the creation of every living thing even unto the elect place where all living things shall, having fulfilled all things wherein they were commanded, be reunited with the Father. 
7 Now, this path is never crossed at any time. This signifies that to turn to the right or to the left from that path upon which the Lord does place us, leads not to the desired goal, but distracts and discourages the work of righteousness. 
8 Behold, to honor the creation and the Lord, the creator of all things, the Ammonites place at least forty nine stones, seven for each of the sacred directions, in the place of the fire and they build a great fire around them so that they are made very hot. 
9 And those who would offer sacrifice gather around the fire with the Peli and they sing and pray, giving thanks for the bounty that is creation. And the Peli who shall officiate takes an incense of sacred herbs and covers the body of each person with a purifying smoke. 
10 Then he raises the bowl in the sacred directions and offers smoke to the Father and Mother, to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost. He then offers the bowl to the sacred directions imploring the Father for the blessing that each direction signifies and implies. 
11 And these are the sacred directions: the Peli raises the incense to the center of the sky above his head. This is a holy offering of prayer to the Father. Then he raises the incense to the center and touches the altar mound with the bowl. This is a holy offering of prayer to the Mother. Then he raises the incense to the West. This is a prayer for knowledge and discernment. Then he raises the incense to the North. This is a holy offering of prayer to the Holy Ghost and a supplication for the gifts of the spirit. Then he raises the incense to the East. This is a prayer and supplication for the witness and visitation of angels and the spirits of just men and women made perfect. Then he raises the incense to the South. This is a prayer for the health of the body of all those who would offer sacrifice. 
12 Having finished the ceremony, the Peli enters the tabernacle and prepares all things, praying earnestly on behalf of those who come to offer sacrifice. 
13 When he has finished praying, the Peli invites the others to bow themselves down and enter the tabernacle. Now, the door of the tabernacle is low so that it can only be entered on the knees, wherefore it is called a “lodge”, and all who enter therein make a solemn and holy declaration of their relationship to all things created. 
14 When all have entered in on bended knee and are seated around the hearth, the Peli calls for seven stones from the fire, and they are brought to him with a large fork. And when he has arranged the stones, he sings a thanksgiving song. 
15 When the song is finished, each person states the intent of their heart and prays to the Father, giving thanks for all things and especially for the sacrifice of the Son. 
16 During this time the Peli pours water upon the heated stones and the tabernacle becomes very hot, for the door has been shut and the steam surrounds each person. And the heat is very great and each person suffers pain and anguish because of the heat. And great drops of sweat issue from every pore and they are immersed from the top of their head, and all the hair thereon, to the bottom of their feet, in their own water. 
17 When all have prayed and sacrificed of their own bodies, the Peli opens the door and the people come out and gather again around the fire. This ceremony is repeated at least three times again and as many as seven. 
18 Behold, this is the manner of sacrifice among the Ammonites, and it is known as the purification after the manner of the Ammonites, wherein each person gives not a bullock, or a lamb, or a flight. But rather, they sacrifice of themselves in remembrance of the creation, in declaration of the intent of their hearts, and in honor of the sacrifice of the Son. Which sacrifice shall be made for all, according as the prophets have written. 
19 Now, this sacred manner of sacrifice is usually done by men, for women make a greater sacrifice. Nevertheless, on special occasions, or for special purposes, women make this sacrifice also. 
20 Behold, this they do in order to at once fulfill the Law of Moses and also to look forward to the day of redemption, when the Creator shall become Savior and redeem the world. Yea, He who created the heavens and the earth shall descend and bow, and take up all suffering. By this are all made part of the covenant He made with the Father and the Holy Ghost. 
21 And the Lord has rewarded those who sacrifice in this sacred manner with the administration of angels, with great gifts of the spirit, and with renewing of health and strength. Nevertheless, the temple sacrifices are still performed by the Nephites and they are greatly blessed in their observances. 
22 And this is good. For, of all the ordinances of the Lord, those that prepare the people to abide the presence of God are found in the sacrifices, whether they be centered in the temple or in the community, or in the individual. And these ordinances demand purity and good intent, else they are ineffectual.
 
CHAPTER 8 
HEALING 
1 Now, when there are sick or afflicted among the people of Ammon, their loved ones bring them unto the Peli, and also unto those women blessed with the healing gifts, and they pray together. And the Peli, being specifically set apart unto this calling, administer to them both spiritually and physically in a sacred manner. And this is the manner in which they administer to them: 
2 Having brought the sick one to the Peli, or in many cases they bring the Peli to the sick one, he anoints the head of the sick one with sacred oil. Then he prophesies in the name of God all things that the Spirit reveals to him concerning the sick one. And if the sick one has faith to be healed, behold, the sickness departs. 
3 But the Peli also straitly admonishes the sick one regarding what herbs and medicine will assist the body to replenish and renew itself. This is the administration to the physical body and it greatly magnifies the operation of the faith of the sick one. 
4 And behold, sometimes these herbs and medicines are made into droughts, and sometimes into gruels, or pastes. And sometimes they are powders to be mixed with wine, and so forth. Sometimes they are taken fasting, and sometimes with food and drink. Still other medicines are administered directly to the body in the form of smoke or aromas. 
5 In all these things the Peli are particularly learned and they also rely much upon the revelations that do come to them of the Spirit. And thus do the Peli of the Ammonites avail themselves of the workings of the Holy Ghost and of the gifts of the creation in the work of healing. 
6 But behold, the people of Ammon did labor much to purify themselves before the Lord, both spiritually, as well as physically. And they made themselves acquainted with all the plants that the Lord had provided to assist them in this purpose. Yea, and because of this they did not suffer as much from diseases as the Nephites did. And behold, in this thing the Nephites held them in very high regard, and even they did send many of their healers to learn of the science of the people of Ammon. 


CHAPTER 9 
COUNCIL OF MOTHERS 
1 Now, when a woman comes of childbearing age, she becomes part of the governing council among the people of Ammon, even that council that elects the rulers and other councils of the people. Behold, this duty and responsibility is conferred upon the woman in a sacred manner, and this is the manner in which it is done: 
2 The young woman, after she has received the New Name from the Peli, is brought by her mother and all of her female kin before the women of the community and she is seated in the center with all of the other woman seated in circles around her. When all the women are seated, the woman who has been elected to speak for the Council of the Mothers stands and declares the intent and purpose of the meeting. Then she claps her hands above her head three times and clearly pronounces the name of the young woman. When she has done this, she and the young woman both clap their hands above their heads and say her name again. Whereupon, the rest of the women also clap their hands and say her name again. Yea, three times the young woman’s name is spoken. 
3 Now the Speaker takes sacred herbs in a bowl and strikes fire to them. When she has done this, she raises them to the sacred directions, as has been described regarding other ceremonies and ordinances of the people of Ammon. Yea, she raises the bowl to the sky in a prayer of thanks to the Father. And she touches the bowl upon the forehead of the young woman and offers a prayer of thanks to the Mother. And she raises again the bowl to the sky and offers a prayer of thanks to the Son. Then she raises the bowl to the West and praises the good teachings that the young woman has received from her mother. And also she raises the bowl to the North and praises the young woman’s mother for the sacred manner in which she seeks the Spirit and acknowledges the hand of God in all things. Then she raises the bowl to the East and praises the revelations the young woman receives because of the teachings of her mother. And behold, she raises the bowl to the South and praises the beauty and health, and all the providential practices taught to the young woman by her mother. 
4 When all this has been done, the women all sing a song of thanksgiving together and they all clap their hands together and express their agreement. And behold, this is a joyous sound that they make in this ceremony. And when the song has been sung, each woman who wishes to do so stands and courteously praises the new mother in the community and welcomes her. 
5 When all have done with speaking, the women heap gifts upon the new member of their council, and she is given her assignment to be engaged in, and is admitted into all the councils of the women. 
 
CHAPTER 10 
ORDINATION 
1 Now, those who have received the authority to speak and act in the name of God from the Lord’s anointed are known among the Ammonites as the Peli. They surely receive their calling from the mouth of the prophet. But priesthood is not a thing that the Ammonite men received without their wives. And they received the priesthood of God in a sacred manner. And this is the manner in which they did it. 
2 The Peli, who had received his authority by adoption or by virtue of his lineage, even down from our first fathers who dwelt in the land of Jerusalem, had this authority confirmed in him by the laying on of the hands of the Lord’s anointed. Then, when the Council of Peli chooses to confer the priesthood upon a man, he is brought with his wife before the council, and they are seated in the center of the sacred place. And behold, all the Council of Peli are seated in circles around them. 
3 And when all are properly seated, the principle Peli stands and states the purpose of the gathered council and pronounces the name of the man and of the woman and declares that they are Husband and Wife. But this is not all. He also courteously praises the man and the woman and honors them, and all the council clap their hands and express their agreement. 
4 Then the Peli takes a bowl of sacred herbs and strikes fire to it so that the incense rises up and covers all those present. And he raises the bowl in all the sacred directions, as has hitherto been described. Then he places his hands upon the head of the man with his left hand and upon the head of the woman with his right hand. And, stating his own right and authority to do so, in a clear voice, he confers upon them the Priesthood of God, the two to hold jointly and both to officiate in it at the appropriate times and places. Then he utters whatever words of prophecy the Spirit reveals to him. When he has done with prophecy, he clearly states the name of the man and of the woman again, and all the council clap their hands three times together, and express their agreement. 
5 This is the sacred manner in which the Priesthood of God is conferred upon men and women among the Ammonites. 


CHAPTER 11 
SABBATH WORSHIP 
1 Now, the Ammonites do not build synagogues after the manner of the Nephites, but every family worships together in their homes on the Sabbath Day. And this is the sacred manner in which they observe to worship on the Sabbath. 
2 In the morning of the Sabbath, the family arises and each person washes themselves and they dress themselves in the sacred clothing placed upon them by the Peli, and if they are too young to have received the sacred clothing, they dress in their best attire. And they gather themselves, sometimes in small family groups and sometimes in large groups of many families, and they sing a song of thanksgiving together. Then the husband of the home in which the family is gathered stands and speaks the peaceable things of the kingdom of God. And sometimes this is done by the spirit of revelation and of prophecy, and sometimes this is done by reading from the sacred records. 
3 When he is finished speaking in a sacred manner, his wife stands and also speaks in a sacred manner by the gifts of the Spirit within her. And every member of the family from father and mother to little children, when the Spirit is upon them, do stand and speak in a sacred manner. And all who hear do clap their hands together and express their agreement. 
4 When all are finished speaking, the father stands again and takes sacred herbs in a bowl and strikes fire to it, and the incense rises up to cover all the people. Then he raises the bowl in the sacred directions and offers praise and thanks in a most sacred manner and all the people shout praises unto God in a great shout and a tumultuous unison. 
5 Now, this is a difficult thing for the Nephites. For their Sabbath worship is more sober and they do it in the synagogues, where all is done in strict obedience to the form and manner of their worship. And all is done in a spirit of quiet reverence. Wherefore, the Ammonites seem boisterous in their worship and this does offend many Nephites. But behold, the Ammonites come not away from their Sabbath meetings with a downtrodden spirit, but with a face lifted up unto praising God with all their hearts, with all their might, with all their strength and with all their souls. Yea, every fiber of their being doth rejoice in their God. 


CHAPTER 12 
CELEBRATIONS 
1 Behold, I have labored to write the ceremonies, and ordinances of the Ammonite people, for, I believe them to be a good and righteous way and a good path. For all that they do, doth lead them to praise God and to respect and honor each other. But behold, this is not all. They did rejoice often as a community with much dancing and rejoicing. And they did all these things in a manner most sacred. And at each celebration, the Peli stood and sang and prayed in a sacred manner, even as has been described heretofore. 
2 The people of Ammon took every opportunity to honor the Lord and give gifts. And behold, one of the most favored celebrations took place on the day of a person’s birth. For, all the people gave gifts to the person whose birthday it was, and they did sing a song of thanksgiving together, and dance, and raise up their voices in much praising of God. 
3 Behold, they did also feast and celebrate the new year on the shortest day of the year. And then on the following day, even that day when the light of the day begins to increase in duration, they did celebrate with a great feast and much dancing and singing. 
4 And behold, in the high regions of the land where there was snow in the cold months, the people did celebrate during that season when the snow melted, and this they did with much singing and praising of God. 
5 But their principle celebration was in the spring when the fields and forests were in full blooming. For this is the time when the Savior is to be born. Wherefore, the people did array themselves in the Sacred Garments and did decorate their homes and their shops with beautiful decorations. And behold, they lit great fires at night so that the whole country was illuminated with them. 
6 Now, because the Savior is the Great Healer, and the people of Ammon also are great healers and try to emulate Him, behold, midway between the Celebration of the Savior’s Birth and the spring planting, the people of Ammon did hold a great celebration of healing. And they did rejoice and give thanks for the great blessings of healing that the Lord had given them on that day. And behold, all the people, both young and old, both women and men, did make the purification after their manner and they did all offer themselves as a sacrifice in the sacred manner. 
7 Soon after the Medicine Dance Ceremony, the people did celebrate the time for planting. And behold, they did sing a thanksgiving song and offered prayer and even they did dance and feast on that day. 
8 And on the day that is longest they did also celebrate with much singing, dancing and feasting. And they did offer up thanks to God Most High for the blessings of the season. And also during this time they did often celebrate when the day had come to an end and they did look up into the sky and count the stars. For all who do this do know that they are numerous. And the Ammonites also knew that their blessings were also exceedingly numerous. Wherefore, they did often come together as small groups or as large to celebrate the stars and offer thanks for their many blessings. 
9 Now, when the season of growing did draw to an end, the people did come together after the harvest to offer thanks and to rejoice and celebrate the bounty of the Lord. And all people did sing and give praise in this celebration, and the Clan Mothers did distribute the harvest to all the people, and there was no want amongst them and no contention because all received of the labors of the community. 
10 And when the days began to grow shorter and colder, the mothers and fathers would often bring their children together and tell them of the doings of the servants of God. Yea, they did tell the hero stories all during the cold season and the little ones learned of the history of their people and of all the good works of their grandfathers by the stories their parents told them. 
11 And then, behold, on the Sabbath before the shortest day of the year, the whole community met together to celebrate the heroes in a great celebration. Now, this was a solemn celebration and it was conducted by the principle Peli and the principle Clan Mother, they being the eldest of the people. And the story of the creation and all of God’s dealings with mankind was recounted during that day. And at the end of the day, the Peli lit a great fire and the people sang the praises of the Lord well into the night as the fire burned down. 
12 And all these celebrations were done in the name of the Lord and with much praise and honor of the goodness of the Lord. Wherefore, in all things did the Ammonites celebrate their relationship with the Lord and with all things.
 
CHAPTER 13 
1 Behold, all of the ceremonies and ordinances of the Ammonites are oblations unto their God, who is the God of Heaven, the God of Abraham, yea, and of all our forefathers. And they do strengthen each other and the community by their performance. And when they offer up their oblations and their sacrifices before God, behold, He doth bless them exceedingly and they do prosper both temporally and spiritually. And their spiritual prosperity is demonstrated by the uprightness of those young men who went with the Nephites into battle and were preserved, every one, by the Lord. 
2 Now, so great was their love of the Lord, the people of Ammon did also dedicate many things unto Him and into service of Him. Yea, they did dedicate their houses and their fields unto Him in a sacred manner. And this is the sacred manner in which they did dedicate houses, shops, fields and other possessions unto the Lord. 
3 When a good wife of a household wishes to dedicate her home unto the Lord for His specific purposes, she gathers her family together. And she takes up the sacred herbs and strikes fire to them in a bowl before all the guests. And she raises the incense in the sacred directions praying unto God in a most fervent manner. And in the prayer she dedicates her home unto the Lord and unto His workings. 
4 And likewise does a man when he dedicates his shop or his fields. And also does the man of the Ammonites dedicate his tools and his animals to the workings of the Lord and His purposes. And behold, they do all these things in the name of the Son, and they do honor the Father of Heaven and the Mother of all Living in all that they do. 


CHAPTER 14 
1 Behold, when the people of Ammon had sworn allegiance unto the Nephites, they covenanted never to take up the sword against them. Yea, and many also covenanted never again to shed the blood of their brethren, be they Nephite or Lamanite, insofar that some of them lost their lives when the Lamanites came against them. Yea, they laid themselves upon the ground and suffered the Lamanites to put them to horrible death, and they raised no hand to their own defense. Behold, the Anti-Nephi-Lehis trifled not with the covenants they did make, either with their fellowman or with their God. 
2 Now, it was the custom for all Lamanites who covenanted peace with the Nephites, and who fled the lands of the Lamanites because of the covenant, to join themselves with the people of Ammon. For they were kindred and their ways and manners were more like to each other than to those of the Nephites. Wherefore, their manner of governance was also more suited to their own customs and experience. 
3 And behold, as I have written in this record, they applied the teachings and principles of the prophets to their own ways and customs, so that, to the Nephites they seemed foreign and unnatural. And many of the Nephites, even a majority, avoided them because they saw and did things differently. Indeed, the Nephites judged them unworthy, and called them sinners, and feared them, because their ways and customs were different from their own. 
4 But behold, the prophets of God thought not so and encouraged them. Yea, and even they did extol their simple and homely faith, and the purity of their practice unto the Nephites, to the extent that they were made an example unto the Nephites. 
5 For behold, the prophets are men of God. Yea, and they do walk and talk with Him and He does instruct them daily. And they see that the ordinances of Godliness do have for their purpose to bring souls unto God and His Christ who shall come. And this is the purpose of the Law of Moses, that through obedience and sacrifice, men might be brought unto Christ and be instructed by Him, even face to face as our father Abraham was instructed by Him. 
6 And behold, unto those who truly seek His face, the Son of God will surely manifest Himself upon the Way. For He is the Way, the Truth, and the Light, and behold, the true in heart wastes no time in seeking Him. And they who truly seek His face He does bless abundantly, not only with the gifts of the Spirit, but also does He nurture and prosper them, and also protect them. 
7 And rightly therefore, did Helaman and Shiblon hold up the ways and customs of the Ammonites as an ensample unto the Nephites. For, whereas many Nephites were slain in the wars with the Lamanites, behold, none of the Sons of Helaman lost their lives, though they all received many grievous wounds. Wherefore did Helaman and Shiblon extol the faith that they had learned from their mothers. And behold, how did their mothers teach them? Behold, by way of their faith through their application of it upon their ways, their manners, and their customs. 
8 Wherefore, I hope to be excused for my great exuberance where the recording of these things is concerned. And behold, though the proud may judge me for it, my hope is only unto the good pleasure of God, and upon His judgment shall I wait. 
9 But I do exhort you, all who would receive my words, make good advantage of the knowledge of the works of the Ammonites, and strive also to do like unto them. For I know, by the testimony of the Spirit that has been given unto me, that you shall not have received these things, to ponder them in your hearts, except you do receive them in the time of great need. Yea, it has been revealed unto me that my writing shall only arise from the dust in a time of great refreshing, and in a time of greatest necessity. Wherefore, take not these things lightly. Howbeit, they may be the means of your salvation. 


CHAPTER 15 
1 And now I return to my record of the ways and customs of the Ammonites. 
2 Behold, the villages and cities of the people of Ammon were built after the manner of the Nephites, except that the homes and buildings thereof were not so large and spacious. Each man built a modest home for his wife and added to it as the family grew. When the children were all grown, the man and woman usually retired to live with the youngest of their married children. 
3 Both the men and the women, as also the children, labor to earn sufficient to the support of the whole family. Yea, the support of the family is not the sole duty of the men, but all give what labor they are able. And each person does something extra in order to produce an increase over that which is sufficient for the family living. This they gave unto the needy. Because of this practice, there were never any poor among them, and also no hunger, and no suffering for want of the necessities. 
4 But this is not all. Behold, because every person in the village strove with their might to make some little gain so that there was always something in the house to give to the needy, their labors and goods and property did not cause the people of Ammon to become puffed up in pride as the Nephites. 
5 Now, the people did labor to produce all the necessities of life in each village. Wherefore, when fish was wanted, the fishers of the village all went fishing. And when they were done, they brought them into the village and all the people gathered in the fish to clean it and dry it and pound it. 
6 Likewise, when the potters had fired their works, all the village came and took them up according to their wants. And so forth, the wool of the flocks, the fruit of the vine and the grain of the field. All the people labored diligently each day and the fruits of their labors, which surpassed their own needs, were considered the gain of the village and all things were had in common. 
7 Now behold, each family labored diligently as the Lord gave them stewardship and they did take joy in their sufficiency. But also they labored to produce an increase that they might always have that which must be passed on to others. And this they all did freely of their own will, for in this they consider that they did give honor to their God for the stewardship He had given them and for the sufficiency with which He did bless them. 
8 And the families met often together to take counsel one with another in order to decide what must be done. And in these meetings the father or the mother, as they together had previously decided, according to the needs of the family, did stand up in the midst of all the children and their wives and husbands, as many as lived and labored together, to lead and give order to the council. And after giving order to what ought to be discussed and who should speak when, the one governing – either mother or father, struck fire to sacred herbs and raised up the incense to the Sacred Directions, and sang a song of thanksgiving unto the Lord. And the leader of the council prayed for the presence and the guidance of the Holy Ghost. And behold, all the gathered family, great and small, old and young, did sing the thanksgiving song together. 
9 When they had done all this, they did proceed to discuss and debate the needs of the whole family. And behold, they did it with earnestness, but also in a spirit of unity and without contention. For, not one of them labored for themselves, but rather for the sake of all and so that they might as a family have that wherewith to provide for the wants of those less fortunate then they. 
10 Now, in this custom I judge that they did please the Lord very greatly, for they were exceedingly blessed in their families, and the people as a whole wanted for very little. Even insomuch that, as often as new families came in among their communities, there was always a place provided for them and they also did not want, but had sufficient for their needs. 
11 And behold, I do also judge that, had the Nephites but experimented upon these principles, they should not have been so easily caught up in the things of the world. Yea, they might have placed less importance upon costly and fine apparel had they labored to provide for the needs of their fellow man with as much purpose of heart as they did labor to get gain for themselves. 
12 And I say unto you, as a whole, They did prosper as a people and never knew want, except when, because of wickedness, the threat of war came near unto them. But hearken unto my words, all you who might receive them. For, I say unto you, Of all the people who ever inhabit this land of promise, none will ever know more contentment or happiness than they who do as the Ammonites did. 


CHAPTER 16 
1 Now behold, from time to time, the People of Ammon do meet together to counsel one with another, to plan and prepare for the coming activities, and to hear the complaints of the people, or to hear and judge crimes. And this is the manner in which they do govern all their affairs: 
2 Yea, in the cities they have no judges or courts, but they elect a council of thirteen individuals. And one of them is elected by the council to be Chief over the council and have voice in the council, but the Chief has no vote. 
3 This council hears all grievances which might arise among the people of the city. And behold, they also take counsel together to determine the needs of the community, whether more corn is needed or more fish, or more stone, and so forth. 
4 Now behold, the councils of the Ammonites are made up of men and women whom the mothers of the community nominate. Wherefore, whenever a council is to be elected, all the mothers of the community meet together and they bring forth the names of those men and women most suited for the councils. And if the city is great, it is divided into several communities for the purpose of elections. 
5 And when the mothers have brought forth the names of those most suitable, all the people vote on those names and the thirteen who receive the most votes were invited to sit as the Council of the Community for one year. Now, the mothers bring forth the names and from them the people elect their leaders by vote, each person of the age of agency having one vote. And behold, the councils are made up of men and women nominated by the mothers of the community. 
6 And now, each community council sends one or two of their number up to serve, from time to time, in larger councils, and thus do the People of Ammon choose to govern and regulate their affairs. 
7 And behold, the people generally enjoy peace. But behold, when there does arise contention, the matter is brought before the community council to be heard of them. And when all sides of the matter have been heard, the council passes judgment and the matter is ended and the contention is resolved. And thus great equity is had among the People of Ammon. 
8 Behold, this manner of governance serves to unite the Ammonites and also to discourage evil men from gaining power among them. Yea, and it is preferable to them, more so than the system of lesser and greater judges as is had among the Nephites. 
9 For the Nephites judges are all men and are elected by men. Wherefore, the women have no say in any part of their system of governance. And behold, when one judge becomes corrupt, a city or region falls into the same corruption. Verily, there is much and constant strife among them and many wars and dissensions, as is written in their own records. Yea, and they do unite only when their pride and wickedness grow very great. For the Lord does bring upon them much calamity whenever they are ripened in pride. And this does cause the Nephites to remember their God and return unto Him. 
10 And this is according to the blessing and the curse which the Lord has placed upon this land – that insofar as those who possess the land remember Him, He does bless and prosper them. But if they forget the Lord their God, they are driven and destroyed by their enemies. 
11 Now, I would that you consider the history of the Nephites, how it is filled with war and strife. Yea, and they have 
always been driven by their enemies from one place to another. Yea, even in the days when I make my record, the Nephites must constantly defend themselves against the hostile Lamanites who come up to do battle against them from the Land of Nephi. Behold, this is because of the pride of the Nephites, and that they do often forget the Lord their God. Were it not so, they would prosper and continue in one place. 
12 But behold, this is not all. From time to time, the Nephites are also assailed by enemies from within. Yea, these also do drive them from place to place. 
13 Thus it is at this time in all the lands of the Nephites. Even as righteous men such as Ammon, Helaman, and Shiblon, as well as righteous women such as Hementim, do strive to remind the people to keep the Lord in remembrance, nevertheless, many people see the pride and wickedness that abounds. Yea, and they do remember the curse the Lord placed upon this land even if they do not remember Him. Yea, and they look to the Land Northward as a place into which they must flee. 
14 Howbeit, many reading their histories shall say: It is because of their great prosperity that the people did migrate into the north. Verily I say, do not be deceived by them. For it is not because of prosperity but because of uncertainty that the people do look to the Land Northward. Yea, they fear lest the Lord should fulfill the curse upon the land because of the pride and wickedness, that does cause them to desire to leave the Land Northward. 
15 But behold, the Ammonites live in peace in the Land Northward and, although many of the Lamanites who join the People of Ammon because of wars, such as myself, do also look to the north countries, the People of Ammon are content to stay. Yea, they know that the Lord will preserve them wherever they do sojourn. For they remain faithful and fall not into pride, nor into lusting after the things of the world. Wherefore, they fear not that they might be destroyed from off the face of the land, but only that the Nephites might bring in unto them such strife and contention as is always the consequence of pride and covetousness. 
16 And behold, in latter years their fears have been fulfilled. For, the Gadiantons have all but destroy the Nephites in the Land Northward. Wherefore, we see that the Lord keeps His promises.
________________




THE BOOK OF SANEMPET 
THE SON OF HAGMENI, 
WHO WAS THE SON OF HAGOTH 
CHAPTER 1 
1 The prophet and High Priest of the Nem of the land of Meninta, even that Hagmeni the son of Hagoth who first sailed into this Land Northward, has died and all the Nem from these mountains in the south to the frozen waters of the north do mourn his passing. For he had hoped to live to see the sign of the coming of the Lord and all the Nem have prayed to sustain him in his calling until his desire should be accomplished. But Hagmeni was exceedingly old and when the winter came but one season before the sign was to come, he fell upon the ice and was taken quickly. 
2 Behold, I am Sanempet, the son of Hagmeni, even the eldest of my brethren and, before his death, my father ordained me a High Priest and commanded me to keep the records of my family. Now this is the custom of the Nem, that each family considers their works and keeps a record of them. And these records are kept in the vaults in the mountains. Thus we preserve our good customs and traditions and are not carried away by the teachings of men. 
3 But before I begin, I must sing a tribute unto my father, for he was great in goodness and powerful in the Spirit and the Lord had accepted his sacrifice. Wherefore, he was accepted by the Nem as a prophet, for he walked the Way of the Lord and the Lord was with him. 
4 Yet Hagmeni wrote not of himself. He wrote of his father, and of the Twins, and of the teachers who were taught by Nephi and subdued the Gadiantons with the word of God, and he wrote of the healers and of Samuel, that Lamanite prophet of great renown. But, of his own works he spoke nothing at all. Wherefore, I will sing a song of praise for him. Not boasting in the arm of the flesh, for the Lord held him in high favor, and if the Lord so esteemed him, then why not we? 
5 Hagmeni, the Lord's favored, was faithful to the Lord and to his people all the days of his life. From the Land Southward in the ships of Hagoth he strayed, into the Canyons of Akish, where the Lord saved the sojourners with the miracle of the fish. He witnessed the works of the Lamanite Twins as they taught all the people to be healers. Yea, and when the people saw the works of the Nephites, that they waxed evil in the eyes of the Lord and kept not His ways, wherefore the people chose to be a sundered race, Hagmeni was with the Twins and upheld them in council. Then the people called themselves Nem, because of the counsel of the twin brothers of the Lamanites of Ammon. Hagmeni saw their good works and upheld them, to the blessing and prosperity of the people. 
6 And when Nephi taught the people how the Ammonites in the Land Southward fought the Gadiantons with the word of God, Hagmeni was among those who were ordained and took up the task of rooting out the robbers from among us. 
7 When the Nem decided to leave the fair land of their first discovery and come to the protected land of Meninta, Hagmeni became the High Priest and guided the people in righteousness. The temple he built and he laid the foundations of the great city of Mentina. 
8 He found the tombs of the Jaredites and their records and translated their words. He was the friend of prophets, yea, he sat at the feet of Nephi and Samuel who taught him. Howbeit he was great in wisdom and in the gifts of the Spirit, yet he sought the counsel of the Lord's anointed and never puffed himself up. Surely he was among the heroes of the Nem and the people will teach his teachings every year and shall commemorate his words. 
9 Now, I, Sanempet, am but the son of a great man and I can never be as he was, but I have endeavored to keep the ways of the Lord and the teachings of my father. Therefore, I will try to write the things he would have written were he here to see the works of the Nem in my days. 
10 It came to pass that in the year before the sign was to come of the Lord's coming unto His people, my father Hagmeni received word from Nephi in the Land Southward which grieved him greatly. For Nephi entreated Hagmeni that he should receive all the people who believed in his words into our land for refuge and a sanctuary. This was news the most severe, for we knew that Nephi would not send the faithful out of the land unless their lives had become very strait indeed. 
11 Wherefore, the Nem alike mourned for the righteous few Nephites and Lamanites in the Land Southward and did prepare places for them to sojourn with us. But behold, no other epistle or emissary was heard from Nephi. Now this was the most grievous to my father Hagmeni, for he and Nephi were like to be brothers, and indeed they were brothers, both being prophets of God. But we all grieved, as well, for quiet out of the Land Southward and out of Zarahemla could only mean that the freedoms of the people had been altogether curtailed. And thus we occupied the final year before the sign, waiting and preparing for the sign. 
12 And many believed that it was this lack of news from the south which weakened Hagmeni. For, when no word came of Nephi, the prophet of Zarahemla, Hagmeni became exceedingly downcast and seldom left his house. For he had hoped to meet with Nephi and discuss the sign that was to come. 
13 Behold, some had studied the scriptures and said that Christ would come as a man, and others said He would be born as man is born. Wherefore, though there was no contention concerning the matter, there was much discussion. Now, Hagmeni knew how the Lord would come and he believed that he and Nephi could put to rest the discussion. Wherefore, to receive no news of his friend, and to not know whether he lived or whether he did rest with the heroes was a great burden for Hagmeni. Wherefore, he did fade quickly and became as one stricken with great age and bent, as if before our very eyes. And, as I said, he died before the sign of the Lord's coming. 
14 Now, behold, but one lunar after my father died, the very aged prophet Nephi arrived from the Land Southward with a very small band of followers. For they had been forced to travel in secret and disguised in the Land Southward and had made their way but slowly. And when he arrived among us, he grieved to find his friend Hagmeni dead and laid to rest in the tombs. 
15 Nevertheless, he did rejoice that his friend had lived a good life and had never rejected the ways of the Lord in all his days. For man must die and it was far better to hear that his friend had died in the Lord and not in the gall of bitterness, as so many of his brethren in Zarahemla. 
16 Behold, Nephi, the prophet, did clarify how the Lord would come and I testify that it was just as my father had taught to me before he died. And these are the words that the prophet Nephi taught the Nem concerning the sign: 
17 Verily, Samuel prophesied and gave the sign whereby we might know that the time is at hand that the Lord our God is come to redeem His people. Be not troubled by this and contend not. For we know that the Son of God shall be born of a virgin fair in the land of Jerusalem, out of which our father Lehi took his journey into the wilderness. Yea, did not the prophet Alma teach that the virgin most precious should be overshadowed and conceived by the power of the Holy Ghost and bring forth a Son, even the Son of God? And was not Nephi of old taught by the angel that the virgin whom he saw was the mother of the Son of God after the manner of the flesh? And again, do we not read in the Brass Plates the words of Isaiah, wherein he said, 
18 Behold, a virgin shall conceive and shall bear a Son, and shall call His name Emanuel. 
19 Therefore, the scriptures do teach us the manner of His coming unto the world. 
20 Yea, verily I say unto you, He shall be born into the world in the meridian of time and I ask you the same question the angel asked Nephi of old: 
21 Do you know the condescension of God? For the Son was already perfect and needed no life of man, no line upon line, to become even as the Father is. Nay, He was perfect already. It is so that we may become perfect that He condescended once again to live as man lives and to take upon Him the elements of the world He had created. One life more was He willing to sacrifice, one life for all, worlds without end, so that mankind could, by the power of the Holy Ghost, take from Him dominion over earthly matter and ascend with Him into that place where the Father dwells. For He has descended all things, yea, He is in the sun and in the moon and in the stars, for they were made by Him. And He is in the earth, for it is His footstool. Yea, even all the elements of creation do obey His voice because they are His. Therefore, His sacrifice is great, that He should do so much for us. This is the condescension of God, to be born as men are born, and to live as men live, that none may say He is not justified. 
22 Wherefore, marvel not and contend not. The sign for which we wait and which is nigh upon us, shall be the sign of His birth. Therefore shall there be signs in the heavens. Yea, even a new star shall show itself in the sky, one that your learned men have never yet seen. Yea, and there shall be no night, but there shall be a day, a night and a day, when the Child is born, and many other signs and wonders shall you see. 
23 Verily, He shall grow up among His own, even among those whom our Fathers left behind in the land of Jerusalem. And He shall learn as we all must learn, and He shall grow from line to line and light to light, yea, precept by precept, except that He shall learn from the Father and from angels . 
24 But behold, He will be born unto His own people, and there He shall call righteous men and He shall establish His Church and His righteousness and many shall believe. But the more part of His own people in the land of Jerusalem are as the people of Zarahemla. They are puffed up and wicked, and they shall reject their King and shall even put Him to death. So shall the Son of Man die as to the manner of men just as He was born as to the manner of men. Then shall the grave take Him into that mysterious bondage of death, just as you and I shall go down captive into the earth. And this is needful, that He may say that surely He did descend all things. 
25 Now, despair not that I say He must die, for the people were taken by the power of His words and were weeping every one. For lo! He must die so that in Him death may be done away. For He shall rise again on the third day, and this so that we may also rise. Yea! Death shall be conquered and the mystery uncovered. By the power of the Holy Ghost He shall take back up the element of His body, and it shall be changed to the unchangeable. Yea, His very creation shall be altered to the unalterable. This so that we who are His may also hope for a like resurrection. 
26 Wherefore, despair not, but rejoice and let your celebration of His coming go on as usual. Yea, decorate your homes and sing songs of joy. Yea, light your light! Yea, let the whole valley be lit as a token of your belief in that Holy Child who shall soon bring everlasting joy and eternal life unto them that believe on Him. 
27 Behold, it was after this manner that Nephi taught the Nem, and all the people began to rejoice in the expectation of the coming event. And as the snows began to recede and as the hills sprang into life, the people began to celebrate the coming of the Lord. And during this time were many wonders seen and many miracles. And angels were seen to visit in congregations and alone and the anticipation of the Nem became very great. 
28 Then, behold, on the seventh day of the celebration of the Nem, on the day appointed that all the believers should gather together fasting to the Temple and to the synagogues, the sun rose as usual and the Spirit was strong. Yea, the people were so filled with the Spirit that many began to prophesy and many broke forth in strange tongues, yea, and others interpreted. And all the people began to hear all creation sing as if with the voices of angels. 
29 Then, when the night came, behold the sun went down over the West Mountains as usual but it remained light. Wherefore the people did rejoice exceedingly for they knew that the sign was fulfilled in their sight. And a new star that shone both day and night was seen in the sky. Then, the next day, when the sun arose, the heavens broke forth in the sounds of heavenly choirs, and the Nem also sang! Yea, great was the rejoicing of the Nem, for the King was born and they had been exceedingly faithful. Wherefore, wherein should they not be found rejoicing? For the Lord had promised them that He should visit them if they but remained faithful. Now, if their joy was great at the birth of their King, they imagined that their joy would be surpassing great at the coming of their King in His glory. 
30 Now, it came to pass that Nephi was filled also with joy, for he supposed that because of the accomplishment of the sign, his people the Nephites would repent of their wickedness and return unto the Lord. And he did send emissaries down to the cities of the Nephites in the borders of the Land Southward to ascertain the temper of the people. 
31 For Nephi feared exceedingly for the few faithful whom he had left in Zarahemla. For he had ordained his eldest son Nephi to the high priesthood and had left him the charge of the Church. Behold he had hoped to hear good report of the Nephites. But behold, the emissaries returned with no report of Nephi, or of the saints in Zarahemla. Wherefore they never reached the city. Yea, the Land Southward was still a hazardous place and when the emissaries spoke of the sign, the people fled from them. And in many places the authorities of the cities would not let them enter. The very few believers whom the emissaries found among the people were afraid to speak, for many lies concerning the sign had been circulated, which added much to the suffering of the saints. Even they did convince the emissaries to turn about where they had reached Zarahemla and they did resort with them back out of the land. 
32 Now, Nephi was exceedingly old, even as Hagmeni, and weighed down with grief and he bethought himself to return to Zarahemla. But behold, his strength was gone and he crossed himself in his thought. But he did pray earnestly to the Father, in the name of the Son, to know of the well-being of his son Nephi and his family. Yea, he prayed both day and night and denied himself food and water, and he slept not, but dedicated every energy to supplication. 
33 And, behold, I know of a surety that the Lord did answer his prayer, for we were together in the temple when he received the vision of all that would befall his son Nephi and the righteous in Zarahemla. And so great was his relief and his joy that he did fall down to the floor in the Holy Place, as if dead. And we took him to my home and laid him upon a couch and gave him all care. And behold, he spoke as the vision unfolded before him. Wherefore, we did rejoice also for he told of the utter destruction of the wicked and of the visitation of our Lord. 
34 Behold, Nephi did live out the rest of his life in exile in the land of Mentina and we did esteem him one of us, and he did teach us many things that did clarify our worship. He also did spend much time in the vaults and tombs in the mountains, for he esteemed the plates deposited there to be of great value and importance for our people, but also for those who would inhabit the land in futurity. Wherefore, he did spend the last three years of his life putting in order the records of the Jaredites and also of the Nem. 
35 Now Nephi discovered a curious thing with regard to the writing of the Jaredites - that it was not at all after the writing of the Nephites. For, whereas the written figure for the spoken word "man" is always some variation of the shape of a man. Thus, it is rendered one way in some Nephite writings, and a second way in others, and a third way in yet others. In the Jaredite record, the word is written according to the sounds uttered rather than the image of the thing. Therefore "Nem" or "The People of the Spirit" is rendered as an image with the vocal sounds either preceding or following. Thus is the image of the Jaredite writing of the word spoken in our language. But in the Nephite writing of Zarahemla of our time it is written to mean "The Lord's People" or "People of the Altar". The Jaredite manner of writing, Nephi discovered, requires more space but is less easily confused, for the same image can also be used for "God's People", and so also can another figure, with each being different figures but having the same meaning. Now, there is a figure that means "a traveler from the East", and it is not much different from those figures already discussed. 
36 Wherefore, Nephi, seeing that this could someday present a stumbling block to those whom the Lord might cause to come into possession of our records in some future time, he suggested to our councils that we adopt the Jaredite writing. Wherefore, because we did esteem Nephi so highly, and wished to honor him, we did begin to use this system, and have used it ever since. 
37 Therefore, the Book of Hagoth is no longer written in the manner of the Nephites, but is written in the manner in which it is spoken, after the manner of the Jaredites. And so long as the speech of the Nem is remembered, the writing will be understood. 
38 Wherefore, to recognize the word figure to be Hagoth, one would need a knowledge of the history of our people, but to understand the word figure, one would need an understanding of our manner of book making. And this thing was curious because we found it much easier to teach our children in the writing of the Jaredites than in our writing. 
39 And this was a curious thing because, when Nephi read to us Mosiah’s translation of the writings of Ether, a Jaredite, we discovered that Jared fled with his people away from the great tower when the Lord confounded the languages. Now, our wives and our daughters, who are always more inclined to merriment than our men, found this a curious thing indeed. 
40 And in the fourth year after the sign had come confirming the advent of the Lord, Nephi, that wise old prophet of Zarahemla, slept, and the Nem wept for seven days in his honor. Thus, in but five years, the Nem had seen the passing of two prophets and great High Priests. But we had also seen signs in the heavens, and wonders, and miracles, and angels, and we received the assurance through a prophet of God, that the Lord would never forget us in the wilderness. 
41 Thus, though we were saddened by the loss of our best men, nevertheless, we did rejoice exceedingly because of the abundant justification of our faith. Yea, we had perceived the roots, nay, the seeds of wickedness among the Nephites in the Land Southward, even the Land of Zarahemla. And we departed out of Babylon and escaped the horrible fate that befell our people. And more horrible will it yet be for them if they repent not. But when we were led by the Lord into a new country we did not begin anew to build up Babylon in this place, but kept ourselves unspotted and free from the sins of our generation. 
42 Let all those who read these plates, if it be in the wisdom of God that they should find them and the power be in them to translate, let them consider them wisely. For God has commanded all to come out of Babylon and the way to do it is found herein.
________________




THE BOOK OF OUG
THE SON OF SANEMPET
 
CHAPTER 1
1 Behold, I am Oug, the son of Sanempet, and it has been many years since my brothers went into the Land Southward to preach the word unto the Nephites and the Lamanites. And I am the only one of my brethren who did not go, for the Nem decreed that one high priest descended from Hagoth should remain to keep the record of Mentina. Therefore, when my brethren left, I remained. And this was according to the common consent of the people. Notwithstanding, I desired to go with them, for we were alike filled with the Spirit of God. Yea, even we did burn with desire to preach repentance unto the people, and I not the least. But, I was chosen, yea, the lot least liked fell on me and I alone remain. 
2 Behold, from time to time at the commencement of their mission unto the Land Southward, we did receive epistles and messengers from my brethren describing their works. Yea, we did hear of their successes and of their difficulties. But, before three years had all passed, we ceased to hear news of them, and we knew not of their fate. 
3 For the wars between the Nephites and the Gadiantons waxed sore and during those wars we had very little discourse with them. Yea, our communication with them was exceedingly sporadic. In some years, when the Nephites listened to the prophets, we did maintain trade with them and we had great hope that the Nephites would rid the land of the robbers. Then, they did often become rich and were filled with pride, and the robbers did descend upon them and destroy all peace and all commerce. This was the constant state of things in the Land Southward. Wherefore, it became risky indeed to maintain any communication with them, lest the robbers esteem our land worthy of their attention. 
4 Now, the Gadiantons live by plunder not by the work of their hands. Yea, they do not plant but only steal the harvest of others. They do not build, but live in cities abandoned by others. They raise no cattle but steal that which they need for food, for raiment, for shelter, for transport, yea, for all their needs. 
5 The valleys of the Nem are rich in all these things, but to arrive here one must needs cross barren wastelands, or exceedingly high mountains, or, coming around from the north, one must prevail against the Nem of the Plains first. Wherefore, though the Nem possessed what the Gadiantons desired, the cost to obtain it was esteemed by them exceedingly high. Therefore, the robbers chose rather to ignore us and our doings, preferring instead to afflict the Nephites and Lamanites of the Land Southward. 
6 And only three times in the memory of the Nem, did the Gadiantons attempt to organize bands among us. As often as this occurred, the Nem rooted them out through the diligent teaching of the word of God. And our system of government was of a kind that made it exceedingly difficult for an unrighteous judge to take any seat of authority. Yea, we had no need for lawyers and lesser judges because of the nature of our system of government. Wherefore, this made it all the more difficult for the Gadiantons, for they were want to gain power through the judges. 
7 Now this is the manner of our government - each village is ruled by a council of men and women chosen by the mothers of our people. Therefore, every woman who had a child had a vote, and because not all women bear, every woman who had reached the age of agency, that being sixteen years of age, also had a vote. This council meets to resolve the concerns that have to do with the village. And each village council appoints one member to go up to the city to which it is assigned to take part in the city council to resolve the concerns of the region roundabout that city. And each city council appoints one member to go to Mentina to participate in the common council of the Nem, and decisions concerning all the people are made by them. Therefore, without the voice of the mothers in the villages no one may gain power among the Nem. 
8 If a man has a complaint against his neighbor, with regard to his person or his property stewardship, he brings it before his own village council and presents the case himself. He does not represent the matter through any other person but must face him whom he has accused himself. Then the accused is given equal opportunity to present his own defense. Yea, he represents himself. Then the council decides the case. If, after the council has heard and seen all the evidence and has made its decision, but there still remains much doubt as to the guilt, then the council shall publish the action to the mothers and seek the common consent of the people. The common consent is always final. 
9 The affairs of the Church are governed after the pattern given by Nephi. When Hagmeni was ordained a high priest he was placed over the priests and the teachers of our people to preside over them. And this is fitting, for the High Priest of God is a seer and a prophet. Wherefore, Hagmeni called for each village of 100 persons a High Priest and gave him authority to see to all the spiritual needs of that village and to ordain ministers as he saw fit. This council regulated the spiritual affairs of the village. 
10 Now, the villages Hagmeni ordered in groups of thirteen and the High Priest of each village was appointed to participate in the council of high priests for that region. And the High Priest of all the land, even the seer, nominated one from among the regional council to preside over it. This council regulated the spiritual affairs of the region. 
11 And the presiding High Priests from the regional councils comprised the great council of high priests which regulated the affairs of the Church among all the Nem. And the High Priest of all the Nem was the presiding high priest of the great council of high priests. 
12 Wherefore, for all things temporal, the people chose their own councils and for all things spiritual, the Lord chose their councils through the prophet and through the Spirit of Prophecy. All this was done after the pattern given by Nephi when he lived among the Nem. 
13 Now, this system was also adhered to by all the Nem of the Plains and also by many of the Lamanites in the Land Northward, and it presented a great stumbling block to the Gadiantons because that, whereas among the Nephites in the Land Southward, the men were easily corrupted because of their strength, the Nem were preserved from this evil because of the meekness of our women. Yea, men make combinations for gain, but women make covenants for the good of all the people. 
14 Thus the people did prosper exceedingly and we had continual quiet and peace in our land. And thus we lived happily, but my heart became heavy with concern for my brethren. For they had all gone into the Land Southward to cry repentance unto the Nephites and were not heard from again. And, though I am the presiding High Priest of the Nem, and though the Lord gives me visions and prophecy with respect to the needs of my people, yet I am no prophet for the comfort of my family, for the Lord sees fit to hide my brethren from me. 
15 Behold, it is now but three years to the second sign given by the prophets Samuel and Nephi. I am Oug and I saw the sign of the coming of the Lord. Yea, wonders and signs I did see with mine own eyes and I saw and bear record that a new star was seen in the heavens and there was a day, a night and a day as if it were one day. 
16 Now, the prophets also taught us, and so the angels verify, that the Lord must also die so that He may overcome death for us, and that there would be marvelous signs and wonders in this land at His death. In truth, this is the fear that has sprung up among the Nem. For the prophets did say that a great destruction shall come upon the land, and such a commotion shall occur that the wicked in the land shall be overcome and shall perish. Yet, the righteous shall be protected by the hand of the Lord and shall survive the day. 
17 Wherefore many of the Nem do debate and reason one with another, some saying that destruction shall come upon all the land but the Lord will spiritually spare the righteous, and others say that only the wicked shall perish and the Lord shall physically preserve His people. Now, this debate has caused trepidation and fear to come upon some people and they are driven to great preparations against the terrible day. Others are resolved that all will die in the Lord and are sunk in great melancholy. 
18 As for myself, I worry not. First, because I have heard my father's teaching and I have read the words of my grandfather who sat at the feet of Samuel. Wherefore, I teach all to examine their lives and their conscience, to seek the face of God and to have peace no matter what may come. This to me is wisdom. For if it so be that the commotion is so extreme as to wipe the Nem from off the face of the earth, then they who are found worthy shall rejoice with our Lord, for have not the prophets said that the earth shall give up her dead when her Master and Maker does break the bands of that captivity? Then shall we all die in our bodies and resurrect to be taken up to Him when He comes. And is this not cause for rejoicing? 
19 And if the commotion destroy us not, what then? Have the prophets not promised us that if we make strait the paths of the Lord, He shall not forsake us in the wilderness but we shall see His face? Wherefore, arise and make His paths strait! 
20 And by these words I did attempt to strengthen and comfort my people, all the while wondering what fate had befallen my brethren and in what state, either living or dead, they would be in when the sign comes. 
21 And behold, when the days were accomplished the whole people were exceedingly anxious for the sign to come. Yea, the Nem, all in one accord gathered in the synagogues and at the temple and prayed earnestly for the sign. And we came fasting and rejoicing, for, though opinions differed, we were a united and faithful people. And we gathered together to see the sign. 
22 Behold and harken you ends of the earth! The sign did come, for the day dawned but there was no light. And the earth shook exceedingly and the air was exceedingly heavy so that no light would pierce the darkness. Yea, and the gulls fled before the darkness and were not seen in Mentina, and all livestock brayed in terror and in anguish. Yea, there was a great commotion as of the rushing tide of the sea and many foundations of homes and buildings did break up. Nevertheless, the people were all preserved and cried out with a joyous shout unto the Lord. 
23 And in the midst of the thick darkness we heard a voice saying: Woe, woe, woe unto all the people of the earth. Woe unto the inhabitants of the whole earth lest they repent for the adversary makes sport with his angels over the slain of the fair sons and daughters of My people. And it is because of the iniquity of My people that they are fallen. 
24 Behold, the great city of Zarahemla and all her people I have burned with fire. And behold, that great city Moroni and all her people I have sunk in the sea. And behold, that great city Moronihah and all her people I have covered with earth, because of their abominations. Yea, the blood of the prophets and of the saints have I hidden with earth that it cry no longer unto Me. 
25 And thus the voice did rehearse the fate of all the cities, Yea the mighty cities of the Land Southward. Yea, the city of Gilgal was sunk, and the city of Onihah, and of Mocum, and of Jerusalem with it. And the cities of Gadiandi and of Gadiomnah and of Jacob, and of Gimgimno, which were cities built high upon hilltops, are no more for they are covered in earth and new hills and new valleys are found in the stead thereof. 
26 And that city of Jacobugath, of which we had heard rumor, where the people had made Jacob king, was burned with fire for their great wickedness. For it was that people of Jacob that had destroyed the peace of the land. 
27 And the city of Laman, and of Josh, and Gad, and of Kishkumen, which did cast out the prophets and stoned the messengers of God, are burned and all the people with them. Yea, because they did cast out the believing, there was none righteous in them, and they were consumed in fire which God did send down from heaven. 
28 And the voice did not cease the horrible tale of destruction until all the cities that were destroyed had been counted. Then the voice continued: 
29 Oh, all ye that have not perished in this great commotion because ye are the more righteous of the people, will ye not return unto me with full purpose of heart? Will ye not repent of your sins and be changed, that I may heal you? Yea, if ye come unto Me, verily, ye shall have eternal life. Behold, I extend the hand of mercy unto you and whomsoever will come, shall I receive. Blessed are they who come unto Me. 
30 I am Jesus Christ, the Son of God. I created all things in the heavens and all things in the earth. I counseled with the Father in your behalf in the beginning. I am now in the Father, and the Father is in Me, for the Father hath given Me even all that He hath. 
31 I came unto My own and they received Me not. And the words of the prophets concerning My coming are all fulfilled in Me. And, unto as many as have received Me, behold I have given them the Way, that they may receive of the Father even as I. So shall I do forever, unto all those who shall believe on My name, for, from the beginning the redemption hath been by Me. 
32 I am the light and life of the World, I am the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. For My purposes did I give the law unto Moses, yea, and for My holy purpose is the Law of Moses fulfilled. Therefore, ye shall offer up unto Me no more sacrifices by the shedding of blood. Yea, ye shall no more offer your burnt offerings. For henceforth, the acceptable offering shall burn with fire, but of the Holy Ghost. But ye shall offer for a sacrifice before Me a broken heart and contrite spirit. Yea, for him who cometh before Me with a broken heart and a contrite spirit shall burn with that Fire of the Holy Ghost that changed the righteous Lamanites, because of their faithfulness in seeking me. And they knew it not, for the change was imperceptible to them at the time of their conversion. Yet I knew it, for I did baptize them with Fire and with the Holy Ghost and they were no more as other men. Come you likewise unto Me. 
33 Behold, I have come unto the World to bring redemption unto it. I have come to save the World from sin. Therefore, repent and come unto Me as a little child, for of such is the Kingdom of God. Yea, all things but man obeys the voice of their creator even as a little child obeys the voice of his father. Come ye likewise and I will receive you. It is for this cause I did lay down the life of My body, and also for this cause did I take it up again. 
34 Wherefore, I laid down the World; for I am in the World and of the World, and the very power by which the World was made. And I take it up again so that all that is subject unto Me may become the salvation of all those who repent and come unto Me. Therefore, repent and come unto Me ye ends of the earth. 
35 Now, behold, we heard these words in our synagogues and at the temple, and the same voice was heard by all the people, and all the Nem testify and witness of it. And the saying filled the people with joy, for they knew that all the words of the prophets had been fulfilled. 
36 But they were the more filled with joy because of the prophecy that had yet to be accomplished. For they all remembered that it was also prophesied that they would see the Lord's face. Wherefore, the people were not afraid and were not silent, but in a tumultuous and joyous sound, began all to speak and to prophesy, and even some were so overcome with joy that they did fall down to the earth. 
37 And it came to pass that the darkness did follow for three days and this was further witness to the Nem that they did not believe in vain. Wherefore, they did all the more rejoice and did not cease in calling upon the name of the Lord their God. And thus they continued for many days after. Yea, when they were in their homes, they did call upon His name. And when they were in their fields and among the flocks, they did incline the head. And in the synagogues, they raised the hand of fellowship one to another and joyfully cried unto the Lord. 


CHAPTER 2 
1 And not many days after the sign, I was in the temple with a great many of the high priests of the Nem and there was a great multitude of people gathered about the temple when a voice was heard out of heaven. Not as the sound of a trump, but it was a voice which did penetrate the very soul and all the people recognized the voice at once. For the voice spoke not to the ears, but to the heart and filled the hearer with unspeakable joy. 
2 Now, the people began to marvel and ponder the voice for it pierced the hearer even to the very center and caused both limb and joint to tremble. Yet, the heart was filled with exceedingly great joy, wherefore, they did marvel because It did weaken the frame but strengthen the soul. 
3 Now, this is the way with spiritual things. The physical body has capacity to withstand temporal things, and yet fail in the face of the spiritual. Verily, the Spirit speaks but the flesh is weak. Therefore, the people marveled that such joy could come though the body could not withstand it. But as for me, I did not marvel because I have often trembled when the Spirit speaks. Therefore, I did know that the voice was the voice of deity, for we felt it profoundly but understood not the words of the voice. 
4 And again the voice spoke and the people did marvel much for the effect the voice had on them was sweet, but they understood not the voice. And the people did altogether lift up their eyes unto the heavens and did reach to the heavens with their hands. Yea, and they did altogether beg for understanding. 
5 Now, as the people did steadfastly ask for understanding with all diligence and not doubting that they would indeed receive answer to their petition, when the voice was heard the third time, they understood the voice, and the voice said unto them: 
6 Rejoice all you people of the Lord! Rejoice all you who have kept the statutes of God! Break forth you heavens for the King cometh even to judge His people and He has found some who seek His face! They shall verily see Him as He is and He shall establish them among the blessed! 
7 Then another voice was heard, saying: 
8 Behold my Beloved Son, of whom the prophets spoke and angels testify. In Him have I glorified My name. Hear ye Him. 
9 This voice they did clearly understand and many did fall upon the earth when they heard it, for they never supposed that they would ever hear the voice of the Father. Yea, against all expectations they had heard the voice of God, and they knew without doubt that their Father in Heaven is real and that which the prophets had spoken concerning Him was true. Thus, some thought that having revealed this much to them, that He was about to show all things to them and they fell down to the earth. 
10 And many also did look up to the heavens from whence came the two voices and behold, they saw a man descending out of Heaven. The robe of the man was white, or perhaps not white, for it shone with a brightness that is exceedingly bright, wherefore, the color of it cannot be understood. This man came and stood upon the approach before the temple on the side which faced toward the rising of the sun. And the whole congregation stood with their eyes fixed upon him. 
11 Then the Man, looking on them steadfastly and smiling upon them, stretched forth His hands toward them, saying: 
12 Behold, I am Jesus Christ, whom My servants, the prophets, taught you should come. I was born among My own and My own received Me not. And I did drink the bitter cup which the Father gave Me to drink, and have extended and begun the finishing of the Father’s work by taking upon Me not only the light and life of the world but also the sins of all living. In this I have conjoined with the will of the Father in all things even from the beginning, worlds without end. 
13 Arise and come forth unto Me, that ye may prove My words. Yea, come and thrust your hands into My side from which flowed that which preserves the life of the body. Yea, come feel the prints of the nails in My hands and feet, wherewith man bethought to restrain the work of their God. All this that ye may know that I am the God of Israel and the God of the whole earth, and was slain for the sins of the World. 
14 Then all the people came forward and did as He told them. He extended His hands to them and they took His hands in theirs and they knew that this truly was a real and tangible Man. And they also knew, each one of them by their own experience and not by any other man's words, that this was the Man of whom the scriptures bear record. And when all the people had all gone forth one by one to embrace the Lord, a sound such as has never before been heard rose up from the temple. For the voice of the people joined with the voices of angels, singing Hosanna! This is the Lord our God, most holy and most high! And they all bowed themselves to the earth before Jesus and ceased not to sing praises before Him. 
15 And the Lord spoke to the multitude, saying: 
16 Oug! Come forth! 
17 For I stood alike the people, all amazed and worshiping my Lord. 
18 Behold thy brethren are well and shall return unto thee by and by. Wherefore, be of good cheer and despair not, for, because of their righteousness in declaring My word unto the people of the City of Josh, and the City of Gad, and of Kishkumen, I preserved them when I caused fire to utterly consume them. Yea, so great was their faith in Me that they did walk through the fires and were consumed not. But their hearts are exceedingly heavy, wherefore, prepare a place for them. 
19 I have called My servant Nephi, the son of Nephi who did sojourn with thee, to be one of the Twelve unto whom I have given authority, Yea, even the first among them. Yea, and eleven others have I chosen among the people of the Land Southward. I did the same among My own and so shall I do among you. Therefore, My servant Oug, I give unto thee authority to baptize in My name and to teach all to receive the Holy Ghost. Yea, I set thee apart as High Priest unto your people, a presiding high priest. Wherefore, I give unto thee authority to choose twelve other righteous men from among thy councils. And I shall give them authority to work under thy direction to govern the Church. And they shall teach all this people and those who believe on their words shall they baptize with water. Wherefore, if they believe and are baptized in My name, them shall I baptize with Fire and with the Holy Ghost. 
20 Blessed art thou if thou believest and art baptized in My name after thou hast seen Me and know that I am, but more blessed are they who shall hear thy words and believe in Me because of thy testifying. Yea, blessed are they who shall hear thy words and humble themselves in baptism for they shall be visited with Fire and with the Holy Ghost and shall enter onto the Way. Howbeit, because they shall find Me and see My face because of faith, they shall have received a remission of their sins. 
21 Wherefore, Oug, I give unto thee power and authority over the Church in this region, to organize and to govern it. And it shall not be as difficult for thee to do this as for other peoples upon the face of this land to whom I must go so that they also might see My face and believe in Me. Yea, the fulfilling of the Law of Moses will be no great change for thee, for the Nem have always listened to My prophets and have followed Me even without seeing Me. 
22 But that there not arise disputations among you, after that thou hast organized My Church here in Mentina and in the land round about and when thou shalt have taught all the people My words - and they desire to be baptized, this is the manner in which thou shalt do it: 
23 Behold, thou whom My servant has anointed, shalt take hold of them and lead them into the water and stand in the water with them, and when thou art down in the water thou shalt call them by name and say: 
24 Having been commanded and set apart by Jesus Christ I baptize you in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. 
25 Yea, for behold I say unto thee, Because of the covenant wherewith I have received the fullness of the Father, I am in the Father and the Father is in Me. And it is by the power of the Holy Ghost that the covenant was made. Therefore are we one, I in the Father and the Father in Me. 
26 And this thou shalt have for doctrine. For all that I teach thee shall testify of the Father and lead thee to the Father. Wherefore, whoso believeth in Me believeth in the Father also. Wherefore, the Holy Ghost, by whom We are one, shall enter into the heart of the believer and shall baptize even with Fire. 
27 Verily I say unto you, Ye must be baptized by water and this by immersion. For even so did I to fulfill righteousness and to become an ensample unto you. This is the covenant of the body, the beginning of the testament, even the door that opens onto the strait and narrow path which leads unto life eternal. Wherefore, whoso believeth and is baptized by water shall begin upon the road that gives onto the Way. 
28 Now, after that thou hast baptized them, thou shalt lay thine hands upon them and bless them and sharply exhort them to receive the Holy Ghost. And if they offer unto Me a sacrifice mete for repentance, even a contrite and humble spirit, My Father will bestow upon them the Gift of the Holy Ghost. Wherefore, the baptism of water is their declaration of the covenant and the baptism of Fire is My Father’s declaration that they shall endure to the finishing of the work and become even as He is. 
29 Behold, this is My doctrine, and I shall show other doctrine to those who come unto Me. Yea, whoso cometh unto Me shall speak with the tongues of angels for they shall see and converse with angels and shall speak to them as one man speaks to another. Yea, this is My doctrine and there shall be no other doctrine of baptism given except to those with whom, in My own time, I do make my abode. 
30 Thou shalt not alter the manner in which thou prayest, for the Nem have listened to the prophets I have raised up unto you. Therefore, continue to let thy prayers ascend unto the Father, pleading for the poor and the lonely and unfortunate in My name, and I will hear thy prayers by the power of the Holy Ghost. Yea, even by that power I shall answer thee and bless thee. Yea, pray always to the Father and give thanks unto Him and make thy entreaties directly unto Him in My name. Wherefore if thou dost this, thou shalt receive according to the promise He made with thy fathers. 
31 For who may abide the day of My visitation? Yea, ask and thou shalt receive. Come unto Me and I will come near unto thee and I will rebuke the devourer for thy sake. Yea, I have promised thee that if thou dost become mine, even as I am the Father’s, we shall make Our abode with thee. But who can abide Our presence? And who can withstand Our glory? For I am the refiner's Fire and the fuller's soap. Let there be soil in the ore, even a little, and I shall burn it up. Therefore, who may stand? 
32 Let all the Nem purify themselves, for I will sit as a refiner and purifier of silver. Yea, purify yourself that there be less dross in the ore. And so that there be no disputation amongst you, this is the manner in which you shall purge wickedness from you: 
33 You shall succor the widow and judge the fatherless. You shall have always all things in common even as you have done up to this time. In this I am well pleased. Do not as the Nephites have done, for their pride causes them to puff themselves up whenever I do prosper them. Yea, they do think they own the land and they set great store in the accumulation of things. This inclination has ever been the stumbling block of My children the Nephites. Wherefore, you do rightly and begin in a greater state of purity than they. 
34 Now, prayer and fasting doth purify and magnify the soul. But pray not and fast not in vain, with repetitions, but in the secret places ought you to purify your bodies in fasting and your spirits in prayer. 
35 Verily I say unto you, The children of Ammon began to do a thing that is pleasing unto Me. They purified themselves with much fasting and with prayer, and with their loving succor which they so abundantly give away one to another. Yea, in this I am very well pleased, for they do not ask of Me but that they have not first purged their bodies and prepared their spirits, subduing self in good acts. 
36 Yea, when they fast they do not only purge their bodies by the lack of food or drink, but they fully purge themselves, even every pore. And this is a similitude of My suffering. For when I did atone for the sins and hurts of all the world, yea, when I drank of the bitter cup, blood did flow out from every pore. 
37 Wherefore, it is pleasing unto Me that the Ammonites, of their own, have undertaken to cleanse the body in this fashion. For even as I was immersed in the bitter gall of earthly impurity and corruption, I was cleansed of it while in the body. And if you choose also to purify yourselves after the manner of the Ammonites, you are justified and you shall the more fully obtain the unspeakable Gift of the Holy Ghost. Yea, and even I shall be with you and strengthen you, and even I shall send angels to minister unto you. 
38 Verily, verily I say unto you, When I took upon me all things, I did suffer. Yea, so great was My grief that I shall not describe it to you. For I know your hearts and I would not that you should know the full extent of My suffering lest you despair. For I know the tenderness of your hearts. 
39 It is enough to say that I suffered and bled as it were great drops of sweat from every pore and My flesh was exceedingly weak. But when My suffering was full and I feared that My body could not withstand it, My Father did send unto Me an angel to minister unto Me. Even so shall He do unto you if you should undertake to purify yourselves after the similitude of My suffering, yea, after the fashion of the Ammonites. I shall send you angels to minister unto you that you may also overcome the flesh. 
40 Now, this ordinance is given unto you and blessed are you who do observe it. Nevertheless, it is not an ordinance unto salvation, except for those unto whom I shall command specifically. Therefore, it is not expedient that all should participate. Wherefore, compel no one in the fashion in which they purify themselves before Me. Exhort always that whoso cometh unto Me shall offer the mete sacrifice, even a contrite spirit, and a teachable spirit, and a humble spirit, and a meek spirit, and I shall accept their offering. This you must do, for of it cometh salvation and if My people build upon this foundation, they shall reach for and attain to that eternal life which I enjoy with My Father which is in Heaven. Wherefore, purify yourselves by study and by much prayer and fasting. And if you wish to purify yourselves after the similitude of My suffering, it is well and I will sanctify it. But remember, compel not, for it is more difficult than is needful for all. 
41 Now when Jesus had said these things He called me unto Him, saying: 
42 Oug, My servant, choose thou out of My high priests a council of twelve and I shall give them authority over all the councils of My Church among the Nem of Mentina. I go now unto thy brethren upon the plains, but on the morrow I shall return. And thou shalt cause that all the people shall gather in this place tomorrow, for I have received a commandment of My Father that I should teach them. Wherefore, organize yourselves that all who will come unto Me might receive the word. 
43 And having concluded these sayings, a cloud came and a commotion, and it overshadowed the gathered crowd so that they could not see Jesus and when it had ceased to overshadow them, Jesus was departed from their presence. 


CHAPTER 3 
1 When Jesus had departed, the Spirit came upon me and I gathered in those whom the Spirit revealed to me should be among the twelve from among those who were present at the temple and I sent flights unto those who were chosen but who were not present. Yea, I sent fast flights with messages unto them that they gather all to the temple. And when they had all gathered together, I rehearsed unto them the words Jesus had spoken according to the Spirit that gave me utterance. And when I had done with speaking, we were all filled with joy. Yea, we were filled with the spirit of rejoicing and gladness. 
2 Now, because of the flights that I had sent out to the Churches round about the valley of Mentina, an exceedingly great multitude began to gather at the temple. Wherefore, we did go out among the people and did order them so that all could see and hear upon the morrow. And the multitude did sit down upon the ground in their ranks and began to sing for joy and thanksgiving. And each of the twelve, whom the Spirit revealed to me that should be chosen, went and told in the hearing of all the people the words of Jesus. Thus passed we the night anxiously, for we looked forward to the visit of Jesus on the morrow. 
3 And these are the names of the twelve men: Ougan, Menim, Chunish, Kumenish, Omnim, Ishim, Hagoth, Hagmeni, Nephihah, Lehi, Samuel, and Samal. And they were all righteous men who had followed the Lord all the days of their lives. 
4 Now when the morning had come, the people were waiting for the Lord. And they waited patiently singing and praying and giving thanks. And while they were thus employed, there came angels from heaven and they did minister to all and bring all that Jesus spoke to their memories. And Fire did come down out of heaven and did encircle the twelve as with a ring of Fire and all the people saw and bore record. 
5 And while we were thus encircled in Unquenchable Fire and filled with unspeakable joy, Jesus appeared again in the midst of us. And He addressed the multitude, saying: 
6 Come forward, Oug. 
7 And I came forward. Then directing His piercing gaze unto me, He spoke to me many words which cannot be written, and placing His hand upon my head, He said: 
8 Oug, my servant, behold, I have called thee from among the Nem and I have given thee authority to call others to the work. Therefore art thou a prophet unto this people. When I am returned unto My Father, thou shalt govern My Church in the land of Mentina. But see that thou dost govern with that judgment which comes of the Holy Ghost. For in the day thou turnest to the left or to the right, in that day I shall turn My face from thee. 
9 Now, Oug, thou art downcast because I have spoken what seems hard words unto thee. Be not so, Oug. For thou art blessed among the people. Yea, because of thy extreme faith, the Nem are faithful and exceedingly blessed. Behold, My servant, thy name have I written in the Lamb's Book of Life and today I declare unto thee, thou shalt have place in the mansions of My Father. Yea, thou and thy brethren shall sit down even on My right hand. 
10 Yea, still I counsel thee because thou art a type and similitude of Me. Yea, My servants, ye and all those who come after you shall do all those things that I would do were I among you. Wherefore, take heed to follow the voice of the Spirit in all your councils. Turn not away because of the pride that cometh because of authority. Ye are faithful. Ye do well. Be ye an ensample unto all who come after you. 
11 Now when Jesus saw all the people anxiously awaiting His word, and heard them diligently lifting up their voices in song and in prayer, He was moved by it and turning His face to the multitude, He said: 
12 Blessed are you, Nem. 
13 And the Nem were overcome with joy and a great shout went up from the people spontaneously, crying: 
14 Hosanna! Hosanna! Glory to God and His Son! 
15 When the commotion had calmed, Jesus raised His hands and smiling, He said: 
16 Such great faith! Seldom have I seen it. Bring to Me your little children and I will bless them. Bring to Me your sick and I will heal them. Give Me your weary and I will comfort them. Bring forth your downtrodden and I will give them rest. 
17 Behold, ye Nem, unto you I will reveal My strange work. Ye have separated yourselves from the world and have kept yourselves clean from the sins of this generation. Yea, ye have come out of Babylon and because of this ye are exceedingly blessed. 
18 And we brought forth our little ones and our sick and our halt and Jesus laid His hands on them and blessed them. Yea, and even angels came down out of the cloud and ministered many hours with Him until all had been healed. And they did preach and declare the mysteries of the creation unto us. So great and marvelous were the things that they taught that I despaired of being able to write them all. 
19 Then Jesus said unto me: 
20 Write only that which I straitly command thee, Oug. For, that which I teach this people shall not be given to all. Yea, only the blessed can withstand the meat of My doctrine and the mysteries of the Way. Unto most it is given to learn My doctrine line upon line and precept on precept even as a little child doth learn. But the Nem do live the Celestial Law already, wherefore, I cannot withhold anything from the faithful of this land. Therefore did I say blessed are ye Nem. Yea, I have not seen such faith in any man since the Brother of Jared and in any people since Enoch walked the Earth. 
21 Now, Enoch wrote only that which I commanded him, as did the Brother of Jared. Many things did they ask and nothing could be withheld so great was their faith. Be it so with thee also, Oug, for the Church of the Nem is my Inner Church. But thy writings will come unto their descendents in the end times according to the promise I made to thy fathers. Yea, and through thy descendents I shall redeem all Israel. 
22 But the gentiles shall rule until that time comes and they shall not have the faith of the Nem. And thy descendents shall languish for a season in bitter slavery. Their masters I shall make strong and through them I shall make a preparatory restoration, and the writings of the Nephites shall be principle in that work. Behold, if they prove worthy, I shall seal them unto My house and they shall have part in the blessing of thy descendents. But if they do not make My paths strait, I shall make use of their exceedingly great energy to spread My preparatory work. Then shall I seal from among them some few who will come and give over the kingdom and this fair land unto your descendents. 
23 Wherefore, write only that which I command thee, Oug. Unto whom these words shall come, I shall reveal even what I have revealed to the Nem and even I will show him to you on the Way. Yea, thou shalt teach him with thine own mouth. Therefore, thou shalt have no need of writing the mysteries. 
24 Then Jesus asked us to bring bread and wine to Him. And He broke the bread and blessed it and passed it to us to partake, saying: 
25 Ye who take up the bread to bless it shall break the bread in this manner and give it to the people. And when ye bless the bread ye shall lift up your voice, saying: 
26 O God, the Eternal Father, we ask Thee, in Jesus’ name, to bless this bread and sanctify it unto us who partake of it. That we may eat it in remembrance of the body of Thy Son, whose heart was broken because of His own, Who was pierced for the sins of all the world; that we may witness unto Thee, oh Father, that we desire to take His name unto ourselves, and remember Him, and follow His teachings which we have received of Him, that we may be worthy of the baptism of His Spirit and of the Holy Ghost. Amen. 
27 And He commanded the Twelve and myself to go and do likewise. Then, when we had returned, He took the wine and poured it and blessed it, saying: 
28 Ye who take up the wine to bless it shall pour the wine in this manner and give it to the people. And when ye bless the wine you shall lift up your voice, saying: 
29 O God, the Eternal Father, we ask Thee in Jesus’ name, to bless this wine and sanctify it unto us who drink of it. That we may drink it in remembrance of the blood of Thy Son, which flowed from every pore when He took upon Himself all things, and which spilled out from Him when He hung upon the tree; that we do witness unto Thee, oh Father, that we do remember Him and have taken His name. Pour down the Unquenchable Fire to be in us! Amen! 
30 Then He commanded the thirteen to go and do likewise unto all the people. And when we had finished administering to the people and had returned, He turned His face and spoke: 
31 Why do ye thus unto the people? And we answered Him, saying: 
32 Because You did command us Lord. And He said: 
33 This is counted unto righteousness for your sakes, for so did your Father Adam. After that he had been cast out of the Terrestrial World for a season, he built an altar and offered sacrifice unto the Lord. And behold, an angel appeared before him as he thus dedicated himself and asked: 
34 Why do you offer sacrifice? And Adam said: 
35 I know not, save I was commanded that I should do so. And the angel said unto him: This is in the similitude of the Only Begotten of the Father. 
36 You do well to follow My commands even though you know not the full meaning of them. But this sacrament ye shall do in remembrance and also as the token of a covenant which I have made with the Father and with the Holy Ghost. Whosoever of you who have covenanted with Me by baptism, have part in My covenant with the Father and the Spirit. Wherefore, the gate which opens onto the Way prepares you unto the baptism of Fire, and of the Holy Ghost. Wherefore, if ye will listen to the words of the prayer and diligently seek to fulfill them, even as Adam did seek diligently to obey My will, ye shall receive all things the Father hath, even as I have received the fullness of Him. 
37 Do ye this ordinance as often as ye meet to offer up public oblations. Yea, and ye shall ordain they who shall administer this ordinance unto the people for them. And they shall always remember that they do this for Me and not for themselves. For the minister of the people shall be the servant of the people. And when they have learned to do all things in the spirit of service, as a mother serveth her little child, they shall receive all things, even a crown of glory in the kingdom of My Father, worlds without end. 
38 I am in all things. Yea, I am the light and life of the world from the beginning and all things exist by and through Me. And I also did drink of the bitter cup and all things became part of Me. Yea, I am in all things, therefore, when ye take of this bread ye take of My body unto your soul. And when ye take of this wine you take of my blood unto your soul. Wherefore, ye become mine and I may advocate for you, for I paid the price for sin and My sacrifice sanctifies you and brings you unto the Father. 
39 Behold, marvel not that ye knew these things prior to having heard them of My mouth. For, ye have not cast out the prophets from among you. Wherefore, these teachings are familiar unto you. Even so have I taught the righteous and faithful of the Nephites and Lamanites and My words were still and familiar to them. And I see that My words do cause you to rejoice because I say that I have taught these things unto the Nephites and Lamanites, and more especially Oug, that thou dost rejoice. Thou hast reason to rejoice, Oug. For thy brethren yet live and do journey even this day to return to their wives and their children and to their home. 
40 Yea, and many people of the Nem shall be united with loved ones from the Land Southward. For, the wickedness which ye did fear of them is gone from their midst for many generations to come, and Zion shall flourish in the wilderness. My Church shall grow and cover the whole face of the land, and My people shall live for a season as the Nem do live now, and there shall be no poor among them. Wherefore said I unto thee, prepare places for them. For they come with My teachings in their mouths and even Timothy, yea, that faithful son of Nephi, whom thou knewest in times past, shall journey with them. Yea, Timothy shall bring with him the writings of the Nephites from the time Hagoth left the Land Bountiful. And he also shall bring other records that you shall place in thy safe places. 
41 Behold, verily I say unto ye Nem, There shall be many years of peace and prosperity, and Zion shall spread until it covers the whole of this land. Yea, all the diverse peoples shall have commerce one with another and there shall be no war for a season. 
42 But My people must be gathered from out of all the world and I will use the gentiles to accomplish this gathering. Wherefore, a time shall come when your descendents shall be isolated amidst a sea of unbelief. And because there shall be no diversity of the seeds, the Nem of Mentina shall dwindle and the Valley of Mentina shall fall into the hands of a plundering nation and many precious things shall be lost. Then the land will fall into the hands of a remnant of your posterity again and they shall keep the sacred mountain. 
43 But, behold I say unto you, It is My will that the gentiles come into the land to possess it, for through them I shall gather in My sheep from the four quarters of the earth. Yea, I shall bring the gentiles into this sacred land and I shall establish My covenant among them. Wherefore, if they keep My statutes, I shall graft them into the vineyard and they shall bear much fruit and be the cause of much righteousness. 
44 But behold, they shall also corrupt My doctrine. For the gentiles are zealous in the getting of gain. And this thing always brings grief to the people who inhabit this land. In that day I shall cause the faithful to make a regulation of My Church. And there shall be among the gentiles one who shall be of noble birth, yea, he shall spring out of the kings and queens of the earth; yea, and even he shall descend out of the loins of mine own close kinsman; and he shall I raise up among the gentiles who shall rule the land; but he shall also spring out of the loins of My servant, Oug, and is of My covenant people, and unto Him will I deliver the writings of the Nem. 
45 For though I shall establish My Church among the gentiles, I shall redeem My Zion through the remnant of My people. Yea, the gentiles shall be industrious in the last days and I shall use that industry to carry My gospel to all the nations. And many of them will be true and faithful. These shall I graft into My true vine. And they will assist the remnant in building the New Jerusalem. 
46 But the gentiles shall set their hearts exceedingly upon the things of the world and shall not be diligent in rooting out the Gadiantons from among them. Wherefore, I shall use My remnant, even My weak remnant, to thrash all nations together, and the gentiles shall lose My approval and shall fall. 
47 Wherefore, ye Nem, the things that ye write I shall preserve for the end of times when I shall restore My remnant. When, in My own due time, I shall finish My work, yea, My strange work. Stand ye in holy places and be patient, therefore, ye Nem. For, the record of your doings shall I hold up as an ensample for the redemption of the land and the establishment of Zion. And this shall be a great stumbling block to the gentiles and shall be vexatious to them. For they shall have been established in My name for this purpose, and they shall build a foundation. But the culmination of the ushering in of the fullness of times, and the fullness of knowledge, and the fullness of wisdom, and a fullness of the Spirit, shall be accomplished by the weak, not by the wise; and by the meek not the mighty. Yea, it shall be by the slave, not by the master. 
48 But stand ye in your holy places. Prepare ye every good thing. The wicked shall do wickedly in every age, but for a time, there shall be peace and tranquility in this land. But beware, for the adversary never sleepeth and would drag the Nem down into suffering. Yea, ye are blessed because of your diligence, but your posterity shall dwindle, as all My remnant shall dwindle. Nevertheless, I shall preserve My remnant unto the last day. 


CHAPTER 4 
1 Now, when Jesus had finished speaking these words He turned His face to the multitude and, behold, the people began to sing praises unto God with great joy and He was touched by the faith of the people. And He did take Himself a little way to the side and prayed unto the Father. And the words He prayed cannot be written. While He thus prayed, the multitude was again filled with the Holy Ghost and with the Power of God. Yea, they were filled exceedingly with the knowledge of their salvation and they began to prophesy. Yea, the whole multitude did prophesy both men and women, and even little children did open their mouths and did begin to speak forth wonderful words. 
2 When Jesus returned to the multitude He perceived that the Spirit had wrought most powerfully upon the people and He stretched forth His hands to them and said: 
3 Behold, the Holy Ghost brings great gifts and great blessings and I perceive that ye are weary with it. But if ye can bear but a little more, I shall teach you yet more. 
4 And the whole multitude cried for more as if it were by one voice, for they would receive as much from Jesus as He would give. And again He opened His mouth and spoke unto them, saying: 
5 When ye pray, or when ye give alms, do not do so in order that ye may be seen to pray. Neither give ye alms so that others may esteem you for it. This is evil. For it teaches a whole generation to seek more after the approval of men than the esteem of God. And it teaches men not service but rather to become puffed in pride. 
6 But ye shall pray always and this is the manner in which ye shall pray: 
7 Father in Heaven, You who was ever and will always be, holy be Your name forever. Let Your will be done in us and in all things, both now and forever. Give us that which You see will sustain us and forgive us our errors, as we forgive those whose mistakes have injured us. For we are not the first things created but the last, and Your Kingdom was created before all things. Your glory fills the expanse of space for ever and ever. Amen. 
8 Now this is the manner in which ye shall entreat the Father for your sakes, for the sake of your children and for the sake of your people. And ye shall pray to the Father even as I pray unto the Father. But ye shall entreat Him in My name always, for He has not yet made His abode with you but with Me. Therefore, I shall be His intercessory with you. But if ye are faithful, behold I say unto you, Ye shall need no intermediary with the Father, but ye shall see Him face to face and speak unto Him as one man speaks to another. 
9 Continue in your manner of governance, for it is the way of heaven. Yea, succor the poor, feed the hungry, visit the widow and judge the fatherless. This is true religion. Yea, do not accept for doctrine the teachings of men, but let the Spirit distill upon your souls. Therefore shall your statutes be faithful and your laws be righteous. Set no man above another. Nay, esteem not one man above another, but let each receive according to his wants and give according to his ability. And if any give not honestly, let him be reproved before the councils of the people. And after ye have reproved him and he repent, treat him not as a malefactor. But if he repent not after ye have reproved him, he shall have no part of your abundance. Nevertheless, ye shall not cast him out into the wilderness, but of your abundance he shall not partake until that he does repent. 
10 And set no man above another in your Churches, only in directing your meetings, for it is not mete that all should speak at once. But let your meetings be made in order. And when a man sins let him be brought before the Council of the Church. And when his sins are proved before his face by those who are witnesses of him, and he repent, ye shall embrace him and he shall have fellowship with you. But if he repent not after that his sins are proven before his face, then shall ye cast him out from My Church, and his name shall be blotted out until he repent. And if he repent after ye have cast him out, and should come again unto you with a contrite heart and spirit, then shall ye take him and baptize him again and he shall begin again to purify himself before Me. And so shall ye treat all men and women who are of My Church. 
11 Behold, the priesthood is Mine own authority to govern all things pertaining to My creation. And when you give unto any this priesthood, you shall take them and you shall lay hands on them and confer the privileges and blessing of the priesthood of God upon them in My name. Then you shall ordain them unto the office whereunto they shall labor. 
12 And this gift shall be governed upon principles of righteousness and if there be no high priest in the land, you shall not confer mine authority. For none shall obtain this honor except by prophecy and that under the direction of the seer. Let none gainsay My holy Church, for this is the root of great wickedness. 
13 Behold, blessed are ye Nem. For verily, ye have followed the prophets whom I have sent among you. Wherefore, ye have organized yourselves, your councils and your bodies, and your assemblies after the order of My commandments. Now, receive ye My priesthood and I shall give you power in it to administer My gospel. And there are two orders of the priesthood given unto men, one wherein ye are prepared and trained to rely upon the Holy Ghost to guide you and to govern you in your stewardships. 
14 Therefore, there shall be priests in the Churches for baptism and for the sacraments. For purification doth prepare the man to give of himself liberally and, without compulsion, and it is given unto the Sons of Levi. For, whenever I must needs prepare My people, I have raised up sons unto Levi and unto Aaron. 
15 Even so did I when My people Israel traveled in the wilderness forty years. I could not give a promised land unto them until a generation that would follow My commands without murmuring had been born and prepared by My servants. Howbeit also, I gave the Law of Moses unto My children in this promised land to prepare them and to try them. Thus, there is one order of priesthood to prepare and another to finish. 
16 Behold, unto some in this land I have conferred another order of priesthood, but they have been few. For whereas the lesser priesthood I gave as a preparation, for through it the man learns to serve by the Spirit, the greater priesthood prepares the man of God to enter into My presence. This is the priesthood of Adam and of Enoch, and of Melchizedek, and of the Son of God. The lesser being of the priest and his auxiliaries, and the greater being of the high priest and his auxiliaries. The one being the preparation and the other being the culmination. 
17 Ye shall confer both orders upon men and I shall try him to see if he will be obedient. Yea, let all men prepare themselves first through service to the body of Christ and let them do their duty relying on the Spirit. Yea, in love and in charity let him be prepared. For none may see My face lest he be filled with the Holy Ghost. 
18 But if he fill his seat by compulsion, by extortion or by feigned love, behold, I shall see it and the Holy Ghost shall abandon him. Verily, ye shall give his bishopric unto another. But as often as men shall repent, ye shall forgive him and he shall begin again. For behold, I shall forgive him, then why not you. 
19 But ye shall govern My kingdom through the greater priesthood, for through it ye shall enter upon the Way. Wherefore, ye shall have counsel of those who have lived before you, worlds without end. I shall reveal to My servants those upon whom ye shall confer the order of Melchizedek, for I shall be their schoolmaster. Wherefore, ye shall wait upon Me in this thing. For this is the Holy Order of the Priesthood after the Order of the Son of God, and God shall not be mocked. 
20 Therefore, it is conferred upon all men whom I shall call to govern in your councils, in your ministries, in your congregations and in your temples. For I am the Lord, and it is My place to govern My people. Wherefore, I shall call men to administer in My place as seems Me good. And if one so called be found in sin, ye shall remove from him his bishopric and I shall give it unto another. But if he shall repent, he shall also begin again and shall proceed again to prepare himself to see My face. But if he repent not after he has obtained this order of priesthood and is found in sin, ye shall cast him out and have no concourse with him. Yea, ye shall leave him to Me and I shall chasten him. For he shall be delivered up unto the buffetings of the evil one, even the adversary. And if he repent not after he be delivered up unto Satan for a season, behold, he has hardened his heart. Wherefore, he shall return unto his own and shall have no place in the mansions of My Father, worlds without end. 
21 Now, behold ye Nem, the daughters of Adam are blessed from before the foundation of the world. Behold, My daughters, by the nature of your creation, ye do serve all people. Yea, it is good that ye do organize yourselves in all your good and that ye do uphold this nation as ye presently do. But behold, the orders of the priesthood are for the sons of Adam, to be an instrument unto them that they may train their natures to be more like unto the daughters of Eve. Yea, that by the sweat of their face, even by their strength, they might learn to give of themselves for the sake of others. For how shall they become like Me if they do not that which I have done? But, ye daughters of Eve, ye do it already. Wherefore, covet not that which I have given unto men, but rejoice and know that ye may seek My face without other preparation than that which ye have received by your nature. For ye receive of the Mother even a more complete priesthood than the orders of the priesthood that I give unto men, in order that they may prove themselves thereby. 
22 But purify yourselves all ye Nem. Yea, be ye man or woman, or little child, purify yourselves. Receive the Holy Ghost and cleanse yourselves of unrighteousness. Yea, purge from your minds and from your bodies the impure and the unclean. Behold, I say unto you, The sacraments have for their purpose to purify you. Therefore, meet ye often to take of the sacrament of bread and wine in remembrance of Me. Meet often to offer yourselves before Me in the purification of the Ammonites, for this is also approved of Me. Yea, and fast often and pray always. Yea, meet often together to study and ponder the records wherein are found teachings that are sound and true. 
23 And when ye meet a brother when ye are in your way, embrace him and salute him in My name. Yea, never let any person pass you by that ye do not cheerfully commend them unto Me. Let your comings and your goings be in My name and in remembrance of Me, that your lives may become a sacrament. Yea, visit the widow and judge the fatherless. Comfort the weary, feed the hungry, accommodate the destitute, and visit the captive. Free the slave and heal the sick. For I was hungry and ye gave Me to eat. I was naked and ye clothed Me. I was thirsty and ye gave Me drink. I was in prison and ye visited Me and I was enslaved and ye loosed My bands. Yea, I was weary and ye gave Me rest, I was sick and ye healed Me. 
24 And ye say: 
25 Wherein did we any of these things unto You? Verily, verily I say unto you, When ye did it unto even the least of these My lambs, you have done it unto Me. 
26 Wherefore, be diligent in well doing, for ye are all Mine, and I am the Father's, and I and the Father are one. Wherefore, judge not, but do good continually. 
27 And when Jesus had finished speaking He prayed unto the Father and blessed them and the land, and behold, a cloud of brightness gathered about Him and He was carried up into the air. And the people looked up toward heaven and, behold, He was surrounded by concourses of angels. And the sound of His going was as of a great commotion in the forest. And behold, the Nem watched Him go until their eyes could no more see Him and when He was gone they cried and many were overcome and fell to the earth. And when Jesus had ascended unto heaven, the multitude that had gathered at the foot of the temple began to disperse and return to their homes. And they spoke again to their neighbors who were not present that they had seen and heard the Son of God. 


CHAPTER 5 
1 And it happened that on the following day I and the twelve were gathered at the temple in order that we might plan the regulation of the Church according to the commandment we had been given. And as we were thus employed, behold, Jesus appeared in the High Room with us. And He stretched forth His hands unto us and touched us all in the right hand saying: I greet you who art of the household of faith in a sacred manner. 
2 And, when He had finished with this salutation, He beckoned us to be seated and began to teach us saying: 
3 Ye are My friends and brethren. Unto you I have commended My house, yea, My Holy House. See that ye fulfill your stewardship well. Ye are called with a holy calling and I declare unto you that your calling and election is made sure. Yea, I give you the more sure word of prophecy, ye are approved of My Father and your place in His kingdom is assured. But be not too confident in this knowledge, for if a man sin without his calling and election, he may repent, and behold, I will forgive him. And if he sin again and repent, behold, I will forgive him. For I am the Redeemer and through faith I have atoned for him, for he is Mine. 
4 But behold, ye are not so. For your calling and election is made sure. Wherefore, if ye sin, My redemption hath no power over you. Nevertheless, if ye sin, ye shall indeed be redeemed, but ye must suffer for Atonement even as I suffered. And behold, that suffering is sharp, even so sharp as to cause even I, the Son of God, to bleed at every pore and to wish to shrink from My Father’s work. Wherefore, sin not. 
5 Ye have been called to use judgment in your stewardship. But ye shall not judge as man judgeth, for this is sin. Say not unto your neighbor: 
6 See, I am above thee, therefore do thou my bidding. For in this is hypocrisy, yea, this comes of pride. Say not to your neighbor: 
7 Bend and I shall remove the speck from thine eye, and there be a beam in your own. Look first to judgment unto your own beam, and then ye may be an assistance unto your neighbor with his speck. 
8 Judge only as ye would be judged. Judge not at all in ire or in pride. Leave off all judgment if ye have sinned. For, to judge in righteousness requires the Spirit, and the Holy Ghost will not remain where there is sin. Wherefore, the judge who renders judgment without the Spirit works iniquity. For I am the Judge of Heaven and Earth and ye are My stewards. 
9 Therefore, if ye judge relying upon your own wisdom, ye do place yourselves above even Me. And when ye judge, ye do so in My name. And if ye judge relying not upon the Spirit but upon your own understanding, having abased your Lord and Sovereign, then ye deny the Spirit and put Me, even God, to public shame. Woe unto that steward who does this, for he shall return unto his own, having brought shame upon his stewardship and upon My sacrifice. Wherefore, judge ye only by the Spirit. 
10 Ye shall not judge the nations, for ye have not knowledge. I shall judge the nations. And if your neighbors attack you, ye shall sue for peace and enter into a covenant with them. But if they will have no peace and no covenant, ye shall defend yourselves and I shall go before you. Yea, every nation that will not acknowledge Me, or keep My statutes, will I destroy in mine own due time. 
11 I shall tell ye as I did your brethren in the Land Southward: 
12 It shall come to pass in the last days that whosoever will not believe in My words, who am Jesus Christ, or in the words and the power which I shall cause to come forth unto the gentiles, they shall be cut off from among My covenant people. Yea, they shall not come upon the Way and the heavens shall not be opened unto them but shall withdraw themselves and depart from them. 
13 And My people who are a remnant of Jacob, even those of your posterity that I shall preserve in the land, shall dwell among the gentiles and the wicked. Yea, they shall be surrounded by the wicked, as if among the beasts of the forest, as a young lion among the flocks, who, when I shall command him, shall go through and tread down and tear in pieces, and none can deliver. Their hand shall be lifted up upon Mine adversaries, and all the nations shall fall before them. Yea, woe be unto the gentiles except they repent. For it shall come to pass in the day I establish My remnant, sayeth the Father, that I will cut off their horses out of the midst of them and I will destroy their chariots. Their highways will no longer be laden with spoil and I shall remove from them their commerce. I shall cut off their cities from the land, and the hungry shall throw down the strongholds. 
14 And I will cut off the wisdom of their wise ones and their witchcraft will I expose to the eye. Their subtle lyings, their deceit, and their soothsayers shall I undo. Their pride I will also cut off, for all their graven works shall be no help to them and shall disappear from the midst of them. They shall no more worship the works of their hands. 
15 I will pluck up their meeting places and their Churches, and their sacrifices; so shall I destroy their cities. For lyings, deceivings, envyings, strifes, priestcrafts and whoredoms shall be done away. Wherefore, their cities shall be done away. 
16 Yea, thus saith the Father unto the gentiles. In that day, the day of tribulation of the gentiles, shall the work of My Father commence among the nations and My Father shall prepare the Way for all the dispersed of all the World. They shall come unto Me and call on the Father in My name. Yea, then shall the work commence with the Father among all the Worlds, in preparing the Way whereby all His people may be gathered home again to their place of beginning. And they shall gather in from all creations, but not in multitudes, and not driven or compelled. For I will go before them, saith the Father, and I, even the Son shall be their rearward. 
17 Then did Jesus ask us the desire of our hearts and we did with one accord declare our willingness to serve Him all the days of our lives, and to flee unto Him never more to depart from Him. And Jesus answered us, saying: 
18 Blessed are ye because ye have desired this thing of me. Therefore, when ye have reached the end of your years, ye shall come unto Me in My kingdom, and with Me ye shall find rest. Behold your desire is good and will bring much fruit, but there are three from among the twelve in the Land Southward who desired of Me that they should tarry until I come in My glory. They shall never taste of death but shall be as My beloved Apostle, even My beloved John. Ye shall see them and they shall minister unto you and to all the world. And when they come into the Land of Mentina ye shall know them because of My gospel which they shall teach and because of the miracles that they perform in My name. 
19 Now when He had said these things He began to expound unto us all that He had taught our kindred people in the Land Southward. Yea, He did open the scriptures unto us and taught us what we were to preach. And He showed unto us in vision the doings of the gentiles whom He would prosper and bring into the land. And behold, we saw that they carried with them a book which contained the gospel, but it was far sundered from its own original and had been much changed. 
20 And behold, He showed unto us another book together with the first in the hands of a prophet. And it came to pass that this prophet did cause much restoration to come to pass in the gathering and uniting of the gentiles. But behold, the other book was about the people of this promised land and it reminded the gentiles of the remnant of our posterity. And we saw that this little book was great in spirit and was powerful in convincing the gentiles to come unto Christ. Yea, behold we did rejoice exceedingly to know that the book did testify of our kindred. 
21 Then behold, we saw the gentiles organize and regulate the Church once again in this land and their work did grow and prosper exceedingly. But they did also grow and prosper in the things of the world. Yea, they did become exceedingly rich and the more part of them did become puffed up with pride, which thing was exceedingly heavy and difficult for the humble and righteous among them to bear. 
22 And behold, the Lord declared unto us that the coming forth of the book had a two-fold purpose: that our people would begin to be gathered into their inheritance because of the book, and also the book will be a herald unto all the world of the approaching culmination of His work upon this planet and in the whole World. And our minds and hearts were comforted and we were again filled with the Holy Ghost. 
23 And while He was yet with us He began to speak, saying: 
24 Behold, ye are My faithful flock and I shall reveal unto you the very secrets of the Creation. And I shall endow you with power in order that you might do a great work here in the lands of the Nem. For, I would that all people hear My gospel, wherefore, I must give you power and the Holy Ghost that My purposes shall be fulfilled. 
25 For ye have seen that I shall raise up a prophet unto the gentiles and because of him I shall gather in My children from out of all the four quarters of the world. But his work shall be an initiation of the restoration not a culmination. Yea, he shall begin to lay the foundation of a great work and Mine elect shall begin to gather out of all of the nations of the Earth. And many will move even to this holy land and they shall prosper. Yea, even I shall prosper them exceedingly and try them. 
26 And they shall begin to keep many of My statutes but they shall change some and forget others. Yea, I shall bring forth the stick of Joseph from among them and they shall deliver it unto all the world. In this they shall be blessed and shall be added unto the children of the covenant. Yea, peace I shall bring them at the end of the travail and I will prosper them, and try them. 
27 But they shall utterly fail in gathering in the remnant of your posterity. I say as a people they shall forget My commandment with regard to your posterity and shall even participate in the enslavement and destruction of your posterity and of the posterity of your kindred in the Land Southward. 
28 Wherefore, from among them I shall raise up prophets who shall cry even against them and they shall cast them out and persecute them. But out of their loins shall spring blood mixed with your own, a prophet and seer, and he shall bring to light the writings of the Nem. Behold, he shall receive of that great gentile prophet, of whom I have spoken, and shall be gathered in from out of the loins of the Kings and Queens of the Earth. And he shall forsake the world even to his hurt and shall prove the more faithful because of tribulation. 
29 Unto this prophet shall I reveal the writings of your fathers, and even of your posterity that he may also write it. And I shall command him that he shall bring the book, even your writings, to light and shall show it unto your posterity. Behold, I declare unto you that your posterity shall come unto Me and they shall rise up when I shall subdue the nations in My name, and they shall be a delightsome people and shall bring again My Zion. 
30 And behold, so that this record shall testify of him, I shall reveal unto you somewhat about him, that your seed may read these words and know My servant. 
31 He shall be raised up unto the world, yea, the gentile world. Yet shall he learn of Me and, forsaking his own heritage, covenant unto Me. Then shall he declare also his other heritage, even that of a people enslaved. And his name shall be a vision and it shall treat upon every quarter of the earth and shall show forth great wisdom. Yea, and his name shall rise up on heavenly wings and I shall visit him and he shall see what was, and what is, and what will be. Yea, thus shall he see a very far off and this shall be a great advantage unto him when I subdue the nations. 
32 Therefore, my children, teach your posterity to watch for this prophet, for his name shall be like that great chief of his estranged people, yea, even the name of his fathers before him. Wherefore, watch for him. But this is not all, for his work shall move the nations out of their place and in every city wherein he moveth, Zion shall be established. 
33 But the gentiles will rule the land for a season and prosper and through them also will I do a great work. Yea, I will begin to teach them and through them shall much be restored and I shall establish them according to My purposes. Wherefore, your descendents will dwindle in unbelief and shall be subdued by the gentiles. And this is wisdom in Me for your posterity shall be oppressed and enslaved. 
34 Yea, for many years they shall be as if asleep, as a lion laying in wait for the prey. And when in My own due time I shall deliver them the prey, then shall they spring forth. Yea, they shall sleep no more but shall shake off their long nurtured disguise and, putting on their beautiful garment, they shall arise amidst the nations. But were it not for their long captivity, they would not eagerly desire a greater portion. Wherefore, I will test your posterity with a sore testing. And after that they have been thus tried and tested, I shall take them unto My own work and with them I shall thrash the nations. 
35 For when a man planteth corn he first prepareth the ground. Yea, he doth till it and he moundeth it up and dungeth it. And after he hath prepared the earth, he planteth the seed; and behold, it groweth and bringeth forth the ear. And before the harvest, he draweth back the husk and he testeth the kernels and counteth them. 
36 Then, in due season, he plucketh the ripe ears and bringeth them into the storehouse. Yea, he doth not leave them for the birds or the robbers, but bringeth in the ears to be shaken out. And when he hath shaken out the corn he layeth it out to dry in the sun, or he placeth it near unto the fire, that the water thereof be dried. But the ears he shaketh not again but delivereth them up to be eaten by the poor, for the kernels left thereon are not good for planting again. Then, when the drying is done, the corn is brought into the granary and the harvest is over. 
37 Even so is the work of a man and should My work be any different? For I do prepare and I do plant. And when the ear doth grow I test it. Yea, I do try it and in due season, even in My due time I shall make My harvest. And in due order shall all the ears be shaken and done. This shall be the work of your descendents. For even as the man doth call in his laborers and his bond servants to pull the husks and shake the ears; yea, and even he doth call in his women to spread the corn and stir it. Even so shall I fulfill my work, even my strange work. 
38 Therefore, be diligent. Yea, be faithful. Fulfill all My commandments and make strait My ways. And write your doings unto your descendents and hide them up. Yea, do ye this secret work unto futurity, for I will bring forth your works in the day that I do cleanse Mine house. 
39 Now, when Jesus had finished with prophesying to us about our posterity, He taught us ordinances for our temples And they are sacred, wherefore, I do write them in another place. But He did prophesy that He would reveal these ordinances to His servants, the prophets. And I am confident that, whoso receives these writings, receives them through the guidance of the Spirit and shall also receive the ordinances of the temple in like manner as we have received them. 
40 And when Jesus had finished speaking unto us, He beckoned us go into the rooms of the temple and He re-ordered them. And behold, He touched us all and gave us power to bind on earth and in Heaven and to loose on earth, whereby, if the Nem made covenants and remained faithful, they should be sealed up His by the Holy Spirit of Promise, which is the second Comforter. And this He did so that all who entered into the temple might learn to walk with Him upon the Way and be instructed by Him. Yea, that they might one day emerge from the Telestial sphere and be presented before the Father in their Terrestrial form. 
41 And when He had done this, He spoke unto us again, saying: 
42 Go now forth unto all the people of the land and teach My gospel. Yea, teach every person their duty and gather them together and prepare them to see My face. And ye shall receive the prophets that I shall raise up among you and even those whom I shall send unto you from among other nations. And when the brethren come from the Land Southward, ye shall receive of them all that they bring unto you. And ye shall teach unto them all that I have spoken. And I shall visit he that is worthy and the righteous shall meet with Me upon the Way. Wherefore, make and maintain yourselves clean, even this whole people. For I go away from you, but I am not very far. And where I go ye cannot follow. But when ye are purified you may come even thither by and by. 
43 Remember that I am your Lord, even Jesus Christ. I have spoken all these words and my words shall surely come to pass. Amen. 
________________




THE BOOK OF 
THE TEMPLE WRITINGS 
OF OUG, THE SON OF SANEMPET 
CHAPTER 1 
1 Behold, the temple of God is dedicated to His holy work and purpose. Wherefore, all you to whom the Lord brings these writings, see that you trifle not with them. For, God will not be mocked, and woe unto him that makes a mockery of the ordinances of God. 
2 The temple is a place of instruction. Wherefore, let all that would learn of God enter therein and receive of Him instruction into the eternal things. Behold, this is the word and will of God; that none shall prevent anyone who has desire to learn from entering into the temple. Wherefore, it is also not good that you compel any to go up unto the temple. Yea, you shall neither restrain nor compel, but unto the soul filled with good intent shall the temple be open. 
3 Yea, also let the principles of the temple be taught without it, that those who wish to enter therein may prepare their hearts and be worthy. But let no man or woman determine the worthiness of any other, for this is wickedness and compulsion. Behold, if any man or woman act in compulsion upon another, let them be brought before the council. For it is by compulsion that the Gadianton do corrupt the ways of the Lord. 
4 Now, let all they who enter into the temple be purified in body and in heart. Yea, let them first purify themselves after the manner of the purification of the Ammonites. And if not by this purification, for it is not required of all and must not be compulsory, let them purify themselves through much prayer and much fasting. Let their bodies be pure and clean, and free of distraction. And let their minds and hearts be single to the glory and purpose of God. And let their spirits be not encumbered with the things of the world. 
5 For behold, we carry with us into the temple that which inhabits the temple of our spirit. Wherefore, if any man or woman carry bad intent in their hearts, behold, they carry it into the temple with them. In this is the Spirit grieved. Let not that person think they shall receive anything from the Lord. 
6 And when you enter the temple, you shall wear modest clothing befitting the ordinances carried out there. And you shall carry with you the ceremonial robe that is used in the prayer and other ordinances, for at a certain place and time in the temple you will be asked to place the robe on you. This for women, represents the power given them by the Mother, and for men, it represents the orders of the priesthood. 
7 Every person who enters the temple does so upon their own free will and none are compelled. Take then the person and give such instruction as will assist them in making the covenants which shall be asked of them. Instruct them in the New and Everlasting Covenant of First Man and First Woman. Tell them of the development of the Father’s plan of exaltation and the participation of the Son and the Holy Ghost in it. Relate to them of the councils in heaven and the creation of this Universe. Remind them of the history of our first father and mother and help them to walk in their footsteps back to the presence of God. 
8 It is important that each person make covenants in the temple corresponding to the point of understanding in which they find themselves. Let the woman who understands the Law of Obedience and Sacrifice place the robe on both shoulders, for she has received her authority and the power of creation from the Mother. This is the protection and shield, the enmity that the Mother gave our mother Eve. Because of this, the adversary may have power to bruise the heel of man, but man has power to crush his head. Wherefore, let all men know that the first to recognize the adversary was our mother Eve, and it is she unto whom the Creator has given the power of life. Yea, for when her eyes were opened, Eve straitly rejected Satan and he is forever powerless because of her. 
9 Now, let the man who understands the Law of Obedience and Sacrifice place the robe on his right shoulder. This signifies that his authority comes not all at once, nor in a perfect form, but is added unto him line upon line and precept on precept. Yea, and when he has obtained through the orders of the priesthood the measure and stature of Christ, then will he comprehend the sacrifice made by Him. Yea, he will take up that sacrifice also and by it give honor to his wife. Then shall all things be added unto him that are expedient to him for salvation’s sake. 
10 Let them proceed together to learn and to be instructed in a sacred manner, and let them enter into a covenant with the Creator to keep the Law of Obedience and Sacrifice. 
11 And when the man and the woman together understand the Law of the Gospel, let them also enter into a covenant to keep that law all the days of their lives. 
12 And when the man and the woman understand the Law of Chastity, let the man move his robe to the left shoulder, for he comprehends the true nature of the self and that he, alone, cannot serve God. Wherefore, let them enter into a covenant to keep the Law of Chastity all the days of their lives, and let the man wear the robe of the temple on the left shoulder. 
13 Then when they do understand the Law of Consecration, and when they have made a covenant with God to keep it forever, you shall take the robes of the man and the woman and you shall join them. Then shall they both wear the robes upon both shoulders, for they do forsake the world and together they take upon themselves the name of Christ. 
14 And behold, when they shall stand together with the robe on both shoulders, you shall leave them alone in the most holy place. In that place they shall lay hands on each other in a most holy manner and Christ shall lay hands on them and sanctify them. 
15 But behold, this is the manner in which they will betoken their covenants: whenever they shall enter into covenants of any kind, they shall purify themselves before God as a symbol of their dedication to the covenant. Yea, they shall strip themselves of all pride, as also the symbols of pride, and wash themselves in a sacred manner. And this shall be with water, either their own water as in the purification of the Ammonites, or with the clean water of the font. Yea, let the water be pure water of the living font and not that which doth stand and gather, and become rank. Yea, and they shall also anoint themselves with oil, either their own oil as in the purification of the Ammonites, or with pure oil of the vine by the hand of a healer. 
16 Yea, this shall all men and all women do in token of the covenants into which they enter. Behold, if they do this and the Holy Spirit of Promise testify of the validity of the ordinance, then shall that covenant stand and shall not be done away, but shall be eternal. 
17 Wherefore, let them not think to come up to the temple to be done with all at once, but let them strive to obtain the blessings of the temple. Yea, let them receive all instruction in the spirit of patience and through a sacred walk and a sacred talk. For, the covenants are only obtained after the understanding. Else, the covenant is a false witness and is vain. 
18 But even more than this, shall a man or a woman swear with an oath before God, Angels and witnesses in the vanity of their hearts? Or is one having but a hope of understanding capable of entering into a covenant with God? I say unto you, No. Wherefore, let every man and every woman receive all things in the due time thereof and make of the covenants of the temple not a thing of haste, but a thing of long and thorough contemplation, meditation, study and the confirmation of the Holy Ghost. 
19 For this cause does the Peli take the man or the woman out into the creation to teach of the creation. Indeed, it is easier to teach of the mountain of the Lord’s house upon the mountain. And when there has been instruction enough, then does he assist them in making covenants. Yea, and sometimes even it is expedient to take them up upon a high mountain, that they may the more completely understand the creation and the counsels of God. Be it so and let them bear it in patience. For these things are sacred beyond all other things, and they ought not to be rushed at. 


CHAPTER 2
1 The ordinances of the Temple correspond to the covenants made there. They are: The Baptism, Laying on of Hands for the Gift of the Holy Ghost, Washing and Anointing, Instruction, Endowment of Power, and the Second Anointing. Marriages may be performed in the Temple if the couple has made a covenant one with another that is eternal in nature and one which they wish to be confirmed by the Holy Spirit of Promise. This ordinance is performed by one having authority to speak and act in the name of Christ. However, as with all contracts, only the Holy Spirit of Promise, which is the Holy Ghost and the Second Comforter, may seal the marriage. 
2 The Baptism is performed by the worker of the temple or the person’s own Peli, as a token of the blessings of life, death and resurrection. It also represents the renewal of that communion with God that is lost through sin. Wherefore, all people, when they have repented of a thing, may come up to the Temple for baptism, or they may undertake to obtain this ordinance in any body of water near unto one who is commissioned of Christ to perform this ordinance. This is the manner of the ordinance:
3 The worker or Peli takes the recipient into one of the private chambers in the temple provided and appointed by the Lord for this purpose. The worker, being a man if the recipient is a man and a woman if the recipient is a woman, gives the recipient a robe of clean linen and instructs them to remove all clothing and other things of the world and to wash with the water which is provided for that purpose. Then the worker leaves the individual alone in the chamber. 
4 The person removes all clothing and other articles of the world and washes thoroughly. Yea, they do wash from the top of the head and every hair thereof to the bottom of the feet. They do wash themselves completely leaving nothing of the world upon them. Then they attire themselves in the robe they received from the worker. When they have done this, they roll up their clothing and place the bundle outside the door. 
5 Then the worker or Peli escorts the person who wishes to be baptized to the baptistery and carefully guides them down into the water of the font. When they are standing in the water of the font, both of them raise their hands above their heads and clap them together three times, and speak the person’s name clearly. 
6 Then the worker or Peli clearly declares their right and authority to speak and act for and in behalf of the Christ. They then declare to all creation that they baptize the person in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. 
7 When they have said these things, they submerge the person in the water so that every bit is under the water and no part is exposed to the air. Then they quickly raise the person up again and all present clap their hands. 
8 The Laying on of Hands for the Gift of the Holy Ghost is performed by the worker of the temple or the person’s own Peli. This is the manner of the ordinance: 
9 Having received the ordinance of baptism, the worker places the hands upon the head of the recipient and prays unto the Father, clearly pronouncing the name of the recipient and saying: 
10 By the authority in me and by my commission of Jesus Christ, I lay my hands upon your head and bestow upon you the Gift of the Holy Ghost, and I say unto you – Receive the Holy Ghost. 
11 The worker then relies upon the promptings of the Spirit and utters any other words of blessing as the Spirit dictates. If the worker receives nothing from the Spirit, it is better to add no additional words and to close the blessing in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen. 
12 The Washing and Anointing is performed by the worker of the temple or the person’s own Peli, as a token of the covenant already entered into by the recipient. Yea, this is done as a token that the person has received the Law of the Gospel and has entered into a covenant with the Lord to live it. And behold, if there is no token or earnest, then there is no covenant. For, the interest must be vested in the covenanter. This is the manner of the ordinance: 
13 The worker or Peli takes the recipient into one of the private chambers in the temple provided and appointed by the Lord for this purpose. The worker, being a man if the recipient is a man and a woman if the recipient is a woman, gives the recipient a robe of clean linen and instructs them to remove all clothing and other things of the world and to wash with the water which is provided for that purpose. Then the worker leaves the individual alone in the chamber.
14 The person removes all clothing and other articles of the world and washes thoroughly. Yea, they do wash from the top of the head and every hair thereof to the bottom of the feet. They do wash themselves completely leaving nothing of the world upon them. Then they attire themselves in the robe they received from the worker. When they have done this, they roll up their clothing and place the bundle outside the door. 
15 The worker, seeing that the world has been put off and discarded, enters the chamber again, and bids the person to kneel in the chamber, and takes precious oil and pours out a quantity upon the head. This the worker rubs into the scalp of the head. Then, pouring a quantity of the oil into the hand, the worker anoints the forehead, the eyelids, the ears, and the mouth of the individual and prays to the Father, saying: 
16 Oh God The Eternal Father, I anoint the head of – say the name of the recipient – that the thoughts of the mind may be purified, and that the eyes may see what is real, and that the ears may hear what is real, and that the lips may speak what is real. 
17 Then the worker pours out a quantity of the oil into the hand and anoints across the breast at the collar bones and prays unto the Father, saying: 
18 Oh God The Eternal Father, I anoint the breast of – say the name of the recipient – that the heart may be filled with good and that the intent of the heart may always be right and true. 
19 Then the worker pours out a quantity of the oil into the hand and anoints across the back above the shoulder blades and prays unto the Father, saying: 
20 Oh God The Eternal Father, I anoint the back of – say the name of the recipient – that the yoke of Christ may be gratefully borne. 
21 Then the worker pours out a quantity of the oil into the hand and, reaching under the robe by the opening provided therein, anoints across the belly above the navel and prays unto the Father, saying: 
22 Oh God The Eternal Father, I anoint the belly of – say the name of the recipient – that health may be found in the navel, and marrow to the bones, and that strength may always be found in the flesh and in the sinews. 
23 Then the worker pours out a quantity of the oil into the hand and, reaching under the robe by the opining provided therein, anoints across the loin above the sacrum and prays unto the Father, saying: 
24 Oh God The Eternal Father, I anoint the loins of – say the name of the recipient – that charity and love may always be found there. 
25 Then the worker pours out a quantity of oil into the hand and, lifting the hem of the robe slightly, anoints the knees above the kneecap and prays unto the Father, saying: 
26 Oh God The Eternal Father, I anoint the knees of – say the name of the recipient – that they may bend continually in prayer unto Thee. 
27 Then the worker pours out a quantity of oil into the hand and anoints the bottom of the feet and prays unto the Father, saying: 
28 Oh God The Eternal Father, I anoint the feet of – say the name of the recipient – that the walk may be sacred. 
29 Then the worker pours out a quantity of oil into the hand and anoints the palms of the hands and prays unto the Father, saying:
30 Oh God The Eternal Father, I anoint the hands of – say the name of the recipient – that the work of the hands may be sacred. 
31 Behold how the ordinance is similar to the purification of the Ammonites! For, in it the body is symbolically washed with pure water and with sacred oil, even from the top of the head down to the bottom of the feet. This is the token of the Law of the Gospel, to make one a clean and holy vessel to the Lord. This is token sure of the broken heart and the contrite spirit, which is the only sacrifice that is acceptable to the Lord. 
32 Before the ordinance of the Endowment of Power may be received by any person, they must first be instructed in all things pertaining to the covenants into which they must enter in order to receive that endowment. The worker of the temple escorts the recipient into one of the private chambers and instructs them as for baptism or washing and anointing. When the recipient has placed the bundle outside the chamber, the worker escorts them to an instruction room where others also await instruction. When all are made ready, the recipient receives instruction in all things pertaining to the cosmos, the creation, and our first parents. The First Man, First Woman story is related and the key principles discussed. When all are satisfied that they understand the principles, they may apply to the workers of the Temple or to the personal Peli to receive the ordinance of the Endowment of Power.
________________




THE SACRED 
TEMPLE WRITINGS 


THE SACRED TEMPE WRITINGS OF THE NEM, 
AS RECORDED BY THE PROPHET OUG 


According to the Temple Writings of the Nem Prophet, Oug, the principles, teachings, covenants and ordinances of the temple, or High Place, were taught to all people, regardless of their sex, nationality or religious affiliation, and most especially to all children from the time they were old enough to understand the instruction. It was the custom of those who officiated as Peli (the Order of Levi) to teach all the people the story of our Heavenly Parents, as well as the creation and of our first earthly parents, and to be certain that the recipient understood as best as they could the principles of the temple, prior to their being presented at the High Place to make sacred covenants there. The teacher would make liberal use of that understanding of these things which the Holy Ghost confirms in the minds and hearts of the participants. In the spirit of the Temple Writings of our forefather, Oug, we present this work in the same manner in which it was presented to all the Nem in ancient days. 
All of the translators of this book are descendents of that same Oug and we have taken the responsibility as his children, and also as teachers and as healers, to convey this information to all of our children, both of our bodies and also of the Nem and other bands to whom this book may go. This is our gift to our children. It is given in the most sacred manner we know. Therefore, because we are only men and women, we suspect that you who read these pages will find fault here. We ask you, to seek the guidance of the Holy Ghost, that you may have discernment and that you will not reject because of the faultiness of our hands the very things of God. If it be wisdom in God that you receive these things, then judge them by the same spirit by which you have received them. 


THE INSTRUCTION 
The Lord taught many things to many people by employing stories and parables. These conveyed to the heart and mind of the hearer a true sense of things even if every detail may not have been related. The following relation speaks of times before times, when men and women worked their way to exaltation following an ancient and set path. The players in the relation are our own relations. Each of us are also included in the story. Therefore, it is our story as much as it is theirs. All my relations! 
For clarity, we have translated names into their corresponding English meaning. Some of the names are difficult to translate. For example, “Elohim” means “Heavenly” and is a plural, feminine denominative. In Nem, “Pa Elowe” means Mother in Heaven, and “Shi Elowe” means Father in Heaven. “Elohim” means God the Father and God the Mother in Their united sense and connotes the Sealing Power. We have, therefore, sought to make the names correspond to something more meaningful to the English speaker. 
There are several voices in this relation. When the ordinances of the High Place are performed by the people, each voice is represented by a separate person. This avoids confusion. The voices are: 
Narrator 
Elohim Heavenly Mother 
Elohim Heavenly Father 
Jehovah 
Holy Ghost 
Holy Ghost Elders 
Lucifer 
Satan 
Michael 
Adam 
Eve 
Peter 
James 
John 
Preacher 
The Voice of the Mob 
Those who participate in the ordinances ought to have good and clear intention, for God will not be mocked. 
There should not be any manner of ill-will between those who participate together in the retelling or re-enactment of this relation. Only the best of feelings should prevail. 
The ordinances of the High Place are specifically designed for the Living. Because of this verity, they are distinguished from the vicarious ordinances performed for and in behalf of the “Dead” in holy temples. This distinction does not intend to denigrate the sacrifice for the dead, but great emphasis is placed upon what Telestial people may do in this life in order to be introduced into the Terrestrial World and receive revelation and instruction from angels, the Spirits of Men and Women made perfect in Christ, and even from the Savior Himself, preparatory to being introduced at theVeil to converse with the Father. The vicarious work for the dead is carried on in another place, by other people of good intention, and the Holy Ghost does attend their sacrifice for the sake of deceased family members. 
It should always be remembered that the Nem lived in a different time than we do and they received from God that which was expedient for them. That they wrote specifically so that we in these days might learn from their experiences makes these records of some little importance to us.
 
 
CHAPTER 1 
The words of Jehovah or Jesus Christ are in blue. 
1 Elohim Heavenly Mother: Ponder the deep, Elohim. Is it not a great question? 
2 Elohim Heavenly Father: Look out into the deep, Elohim, and tell Me what You see. 
3 Elohim Heavenly Mother: I see space there – space to fill, space to build, space to do a great thing. Long have I pondered the deep and wondered why it remains so dark and empty. Should it not be filled with light? Should it not be filled with wonder and beauty? Where We are, there is light and truth. Our own parents provided this for Us and We rose up by line and by precept to become like them. Why do We look out upon the deep and see emptiness? It is a thing that should not be. 
4 Elohim Heavenly Father: We look upon where We are and see what is real. Out yonder there is no one to see Us. Indeed there is no one to see at all. What need then, has the deep of light, and wonder, and beauty? Our work is for the world in which We find Ourselves. Why should We ask for more than what is? 
5 Elohim Heavenly Mother: I am not “no one,” Elohim. I look upon the deep and I would see what I would see. 
6 Elohim Heavenly Father: That is right, Elohim. Now, because someone sees the deep, I perceive that there is substance there which fills the expanse and the emptiness. It is matter but it has no order. 
7 Elohim Heavenly Mother: It is the same as the world in which We now labor except that, unto the matter with which We do Our labor, someone has given order. Therefore, the question still exists – why should the deep remain so? What ought to be done with the matter? Why should not We venture to do the same there as has been done heretofore? Or shall We remain always here to act upon another’s work? 
8 Elohim Heavenly Father: To act upon what has always been is not a bad work, Elohim. Indeed, it has brought Us to exaltation. In this way all spirit children do arise, line upon line and precept on precept, even unto the state and stature of their parents. This is the Everlasting Covenant. Do You think to rashly abandon that which We have learned from Our own experience? 
9 Elohim Heavenly Mother: I do not wish to abandon anything, Elohim. But let Us cause light and truth to expand and grow. Else, why should We be endowed with power at all? 
10 Elohim Heavenly Father: It is right, Elohim Heavenly Mother. Let Us leave that which We now know by virtue of another’s work and make works of Our own. 
11 Narrator: Then Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother separated Themselves from each other for a season and set about the work of organizing matter. Elohim Heavenly Father found the task easier than Elohim Heavenly Mother, for His endowment was to create by combining matter into organized unions. He made stars, worlds, moons, and other astral bodies. He caused all of these to coalesce into great swirling formations and clouds. He experienced all this creation first hand by placing Himself within the creation – giving of His own substance by way of pattern and form, and the deep matter willingly obeyed. Then He stood back and observed His work and pondered it. 
12 Narrator: Elohim Heavenly Mother found creation more difficult, for Her endowment was in becoming a wellspring of life unto matter. She caused the deep matter to recognize itself as a living soul, and taught it to seek patterns of order, and the matter did live; but, without experience, it could do nothing but ponder itself. Then She too stood back and observed Her work and pondered it. 
13 Elohim Heavenly Father: See, Elohim, that I have been able to cause the matter to become organized. I have made moons, worlds, and stars, such as We have heretofore seen. But the bodies have no life. Organization alone brings no real order to the matter. 
14 Elohim Heavenly Mother: It is so, Elohim. Look how I have given self knowledge to the deep matter and it does seek patterns of order. But the matter does only ponder itself and is confused. Life and existence alone brings no real order to the matter. 
15 Elohim Heavenly Father: Our work alone does not accomplish anything. Our previous work was fruitful because there was organization and life brought together by fathers and mothers. When one is without the other, the matter remains in chaos. 
16 Elohim Heavenly Mother: Why should We work thus alone? Why should We not combine Our work together? 
17 Elohim Heavenly Father: It is right, Elohim. I shall work by the endowment of My power to bring together the deep matter and organize it into all the astral bodies We have heretofore seen, and I shall consecrate all that obey Me unto the endowment of Your power. 
18 Elohim Heavenly Mother: I shall work by the endowment of My power to give Your organizations self knowledge and they shall become living beings capable of perception. 
19 Elohim Heavenly Father: I do covenant with You, Elohim, to share all My creative works with You, that the endowment of My power may be combined with the endowment of Your power. 
20 Elohim Heavenly Mother: I do covenant with You, Elohim, to share all My creative works with You, that the endowment of My power may also be combined with the endowment of Your power. 
21 Elohim Heavenly Mother: Then were Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother bound by Their covenant one to another, and They became one in heart, one in mind, and one in purpose. This is the first covenant made by our Heavenly Parents. We desire that all do likewise. All arise. 
22 Elohim Heavenly Mother: Each of you do solemnly covenant to share your work in this life and in the life hereafter with your own spouse. Each of you bow your head and say “Yes.” 
23 Elohim Heavenly Mother: It is enough. That will do. You may be seated. 
Break for Instruction 
————
Resume Session 
24 Narrator: Then did Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother become truly united, essentially bringing into being living things in the deep that could both perceive and be perceived, beings that could act and be acted upon - the Father, by causing deep matter to coalesce into astral bodies such as He had theretofore seen, and the Mother, by giving the bodies life. Thus, they were bodies indeed because of the Truth bestowed by the Father, and they were bodies indeed because of the Light bestowed by the Mother. 
25 Narrator: The Father placed His own matter in the bodies so that all things became His. The Mother placed Her own understanding in the bodies so that all things became Hers. Therefore, were all things of the Father and of the Mother, and all things were one. 
26 Elohim Heavenly Father: Elohim, behold My relations! 
27 Elohim Heavenly Mother: Elohim, behold My relations! 
28 Narrator: And They stood back and observed Their creation and saw that a portion of the deep was now filled with light and beauty in abundance, and They rejoiced in Their accomplishment. 
29 Narrator: Then the Father and the Mother begot spirit children after Their own kind and They did populate Their creation and They did begin to teach them to become like unto Themselves by line and by precept. From the smallest particle to the largest astral system, the Father and the Mother taught Their children to learn and to grow by participating in the creation personally. They bestowed upon Their own children portions of Their own endowment of power, that they also might create worlds and thereby progress toward the state and stature of their Parents. 
30 Narrator: And when they had received these great gifts, and when they had each undertaken the work of creation, the children no longer enjoyed the presence of the Father and the Mother. For, they had all entered into the Everlasting Covenant and the matter of their creations could not abide the presence of Beings until those creations had progressed into that glory. Should any of them come into the presence of a Celestial Being before such progression had taken place, their matter would disintegrate and they must begin that portion of creation again. Therefore, the Father and the Mother refrained from making Their presence known unto them, but waited upon the plan to bring them together once again. Notwithstanding, They could still observe from a distance the creations and works of Their children without disrupting them. 
31 Elohim Heavenly Mother: Each of you created worlds in the pre-earth life. In the creation of these worlds, you participated in every step of development. 
32 Elohim Heavenly Father: When the first atoms combined to form the clouds of matter from which worlds were made, each of you lived in that creation. Your matter was part of it, and it was part of you. Because of this, in the face of great faith, the atoms respond and miracles take place. They know you, for they are your relations. 
33 Elohim Heavenly Mother: When the first atoms combined into molecules, each of you lived in that creation. Your matter was part of it, and it was part of you. Because of this, in the face of great faith, the molecules respond and miracles take place. They know you, for they are your relations. 
34 Elohim Heavenly Father: When the first molecules combined into cells, each of you lived in that creation. Your matter was part of it, and it was part of you. Because of this, in the face of great faith, the cells respond and healing takes place. They know you, for they are your relations. 
35 Elohim Heavenly Mother: When the first cells formed into tissues, each of you lived in that creation. Your matter was part of it, and it was part of you. Because of this, in the face of great faith, the tissues respond and rejuvenation takes place. They know you, for they are your relations. In every stage and step of development – from mineral, to plant, to animal, to human being, each of you lived in that creation. And, in every advancement in development, your matter was part of it, and it was part of you - particles, and worlds without end - lives and deaths without end - joy and sorrow without end - light and darkness without end. All this because the Father gave organization to the matter of creation, and because the Mother gave thought to the organized matter. Because of this, an atom may recognize itself as well as that part of you in it. Because of this, all the matter of creation may recognize itself and that part of you in it. 
36 Elohim Heavenly Father: This is the continuation of the deaths and the Everlasting Covenant, for through it all things become subject unto they who transcended from the matter into the fullness of light. And ages and ages of lives of men, even eternities, are consumed in this everlasting progression. And immense is the joy, and also the suffering. Nevertheless, eternal life is finally attained in this way, line upon line, precept on precept. 
37 Narrator: And the Father and the Mother knew that Their work was good, for it is by this Everlasting Covenant that They attained to Their stature and to the endowment of Their power. 
38 Narrator: And Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother were not alone in the bosom of eternity. There were others like Them, as well as Their own Spirit Children. But a time came when all Their children were occupied in making their own creation and following the path of the Universe. It was in that time that Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother took counsel with each other: 
39 Elohim Heavenly Mother: It is long since I have traveled about and observed the many creations of Our children. I know that We will not be able to speak with any of them personally, lest We destroy their work because of Our own glory, but would it not be interesting to go and watch them in their labors? 
40 Elohim Heavenly Father: It would be interesting. 
41 Elohim Heavenly Mother: Perchance, We may see something different. 
42 Narrator: Then Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother traveled for a long time observing the development of Their children and of the new worlds they were building. This gave Them much joy in the knowledge that each creation was one of Their children in the process of becoming like Them. 
43 Narrator: After a very long journey and much observation, They came to a place where They did not expect to find people (for They knew the creation, and were acquainted with the nature of things), but They were surprised and delighted to find a small group of people living next to a river. The people had built rude huts of the sticks and of the reeds that grew along the edge of the river, and they were subsisting on fish and mussels from the river and on roots and tubers from the river banks. 
44 Narrator: As They watched these surprising people, They saw a curious thing. Moving about among them was a Being that the people evidently could not see. From one person to another, this one darted, whispering in their ears. Then one of the men of this small family group took down his hut and moved it to higher ground. He also began gathering edible tubers and planted them extensively along the shoreline of the river and in the swampy places. As They watched, Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother noticed that most of the people began to do the same thing. When the river flooded, only a few of the people who were left on the river bank lost their homes and belongings. This They found very curious. For, They knew that the people were developing well ahead of that rate of development They had heretofore seen. 
45 Narrator: On another occasion, and on another world, They observed two opposing armies readying for battle. The defiant people were all on horseback and arrayed for war, each believing themselves justified, each ready to face death to prove it. Then once again, a Shadowy Figure, visible only to Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother, moved from the one great leader to the other, whispering something to them. 
46 Narrator: Suddenly, one of the leaders rode out into the middle of the field of battle accompanied by two of his companions. They stood there like statues until the leader of the opposing army rode out with a small party of his men. After a lengthy discussion, the stern faced warriors turned and rejoined their ranks. Then all at once the two hosts began to break up and go in opposite directions. The discipline gone and with it all need to justify their position. The conflict was over. 
47 Narrator: Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother decided to follow this Shadowy Being as It moved from one project to another. It looked here and looked there and They followed It. They called the being Holy Ghost and for a long, long time They watched Him change and influence all of the men and women who would listen to His whisperings. They began to notice that it was only at crucial points of emergence that Holy Ghost intervened, and that His actions had the effect of reducing the time it took for societies to move into that point where self-mastery and discipline is attained. Not once did Holy Ghost speak to the children of the Father and the Mother while they were yet in states of development in lesser kingdoms. Never did Holy Ghost suggest to the stone that it change its position. Never did Holy Ghost suggest to the willow that it alter its course. Never did Holy Ghost whisper to the lion, the bear, the horse, or any other being other than a man or a woman. It was only in the final stages of development that Holy Ghost sought to alter the course of progression. 
48 Narrator: Finally, Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother decided the time had come to make some kind of contact with Holy Ghost. 
49 Elohim Heavenly Father: This is a thing not seen anywhere in the Everlasting Covenant. 
50 Elohim Heavenly Mother: Surely, this is a new and a curious thing. 
51 Narrator: As They thus counseled together, They realized the impact Their discovery would have on all aspects of human existence and progress. Surely, if one knew an unknown thing could exist, could not many? The cosmos is a place of immenseness and, although such a thing might not overturn all things as they stood at that time, was this not an indication that alternatives do exist? That a thing had always been done one way no longer required that it must always be done in that way. Such a thing does not unmake the Universe, but it does remake it, in terms of the infinite possibilities and alternatives to action. 
52 Narrator: So, They approached Holy Ghost and spoke to Him. 
53 Elohim Heavenly Father: Lo, Shadowing One. We are the creators of these with whom You meddle. What are You and where do You come from? 
54 Holy Ghost: I greet You. I am as You see, and I am just as You, from this very place. 
55 Elohim Heavenly Mother: Look, Elohim, this One is intelligent. Tell Me, Shadowy One, who of Us created You and sent You? 
56 Holy Ghost: I am not made by any such as You, but I am. 
57 Elohim Heavenly Father: Elohim, this One is not as We are, but I perceive that He is a personage of Spirit. Observe how He does interact with Our children, yet He disrupts them not in their progress. This thing surely is new in all the world. 
58 Elohim Heavenly Mother: That is right, Elohim. This is a new being, indeed, and fortunate are We that we may hold concourse with Him. 
59 Holy Ghost: I am. Neither new, nor old am I. But My kind is many and we have always been. 
60 Narrator: Holy Ghost was not surprised by Elohim Heavenly Father’s and Elohim Heavenly Mother’s curiosity. He had also been curious about Them, but it was not His way to openly address anyone. His way was one of more gentle influence. But once the Three began to counsel together, Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother realized that there was a great deal yet to be learned about the cosmos and that there was much that needed to be done about it. 
61 Holy Ghost: Your children have I always loved. For, of all the physical creations, they are capable of sensing My influence. I know that not all unto whom I whisper will respond. Nevertheless, I have learned that the men and women, although they are alike to the other creations in their corporality, yet they seem to posses a more refined center than their physical bodies alone. Should they be moved upon to exercise it, they do expand and grow until that center can be made to fill their whole creation. I have seen this produce such a transformation in them that they become easy to influence to do good one to another. Behold, I have made this My own work. 
62 Elohim Heavenly Mother: These, Our children, are striving, through almost endless toil, to become like unto Us. They are passing through their creative works utilizing a portion of the endowment of power within Us. Indeed, this is the nature of our race. We are all engaged in it until we progress to that point wherein we may command matter, of our own selves. This is Exaltation. All people like unto Us are so engaged. 
63 Elohim Heavenly Father: Thus has it always been unto us, even to act and to be acted upon in the body, but striving to gain that glory wherein we may act and be not acted upon only. Thus we pass from one state into another. Yea, thus we emerge into the exalted state, after worlds without end. 
64 Elohim Heavenly Mother: Tell Us of Yourself, Shadowy One. Who are You, and of what kind of being are You? Are You an unfinished being, like unto Our children before they begin their creative work? For, they are born in Spirit and have no ponderable matter until We loan it to them of Our creation. Thus are they placed upon the road that leads them to the acquisition of their own matter. Are You like unto them before they took upon them Our matter? 
65 Elohim Heavenly Father: Nay, Elohim, I think the body of Holy Ghost is discernible only to those of us whose spirits are bound to their bodies. Our children cannot see Him. He is, I perceive, like Us, and yet unlike. 
66 Holy Ghost: My people are able to act upon matter in certain ways, but we are unable to organize it or give life unto it. We can cause Your children to act upon their power to create, but we have no creative power of our own. 
67 Elohim Heavenly Father: You do cause Our children to learn and grow at a remarkable pace. 
68 Elohim Heavenly Mother: You cause them to advance in their progress. This is something different, Elohim Heavenly Father. Let Us stay with Holy Ghost and have joy in watching Our children grow. 
69 Holy Ghost: Why do You not do as I do? 
70 Elohim Heavenly Mother: We cannot interfere without great risk to the bodies of Our children. Should We interfere when they are not prepared, their bodies cannot withstand Our glory, and they disintegrate. They then must begin again and even more time is required for them to become like Us. 
71 Holy Ghost: The Law of Restoration is a cosmic verity. No matter whether your nature be ponderable or spiritual, that which is begun anywhere has physical consequences everywhere. It is probable that the process of progression You have described to Me originates much discord and disharmony in the cosmos. For every singularity of harmony and order, how many singularities of discord, disorder and disharmony are created as your children struggle for eons through the process of emergence? 
72 Elohim Heavenly Father: In consequence of the Everlasting Covenant, a great many errors are made which, eventually, lead to one singularity of truth. 
73 Holy Ghost: It is a way that attains the desired end. That much is proven in abundance, if only by the fact of Your own existence. But consider, You were unaware of Me and of my kind. That You knew not of Me is no commentary upon Your intelligence. It cannot be forgotten however, that I did nonetheless exist, even though You had no knowledge of Me. You speak of things that have always been thus and so. And you speak of a plan that causes much suffering. I tell You that this suffering is what caused Me to come from the place of My abode even out into the deep to ascertain the source of it. It is this suffering that I strive to relieve. 
74 Elohim Heavenly Father: The Everlasting Covenant is the Way of Heaven. It has always been and shall always be. If it causes much suffering, We are comforted in the knowledge that, in the end, Our children do emerge out of the suffering to become like Us. 
75 Holy Ghost: I am not convinced that because this Everlasting Covenant has always created vast amounts of suffering, but in the end Eternal Life, that it must necessarily signify that there is no other way to attain Eternal Life. 
76 Elohim Heavenly Mother: What has always been is changed. What We knew to be true of a surety was true. But here is a truth We knew not of, but is also assuredly true. 
77 Elohim Heavenly Father: The World is a very big place. 
78 Holy Ghost: Let us make an experiment. I am always alert to the opportunity to meddle for good. Look at Me, Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother, I am not corporeal in the same sense that You are. I have often, as You have Yourselves witnessed, made My sort of contact with Your children without any ill effect to their bodies. 
79 Elohim Heavenly Mother: Indeed no. We have witnessed the contrary. Your influence has only been for the good in all that We have observed. 
80 Holy Ghost: Let Me whisper what counsel You might have to whichever of Your children You might choose. Let Us observe conditions as a result of that personal interference. It may be that We can work together to fulfill the Everlasting Covenant and, at the same time, overcome some of the disorder it causes in the cosmos. 
81 Elohim Heavenly Father: It is well. Our Firstborn Son is very near to finishing His work already. We will take You to where He is laboring. If such interference harms Him, less of His creative work might be affected. 
82 Elohim Heavenly Mother: This is the World of Our Firstborn, who has progressed almost to the end of the mortal cycle. Everything in this creation will become part of Him. The very elements which We have loaned Him for a season obey His voice because He is in them, He having descended through them all. At each crucial point where evolutionary change has taken place, He has been there in the life of the entity making the change. In this way, the Creator becomes part of the Creation. It is the only way that the Natural Man may be subdued and the Spiritual Man, or Man of Holiness, arises out of corrupt matter and becomes master of it. In the final phase, the Firstborn will take on mortality one last time to overcome it. In the last of the Lives and the Deaths, He will become exalted with all of His Creation. Then shall all of this matter become His. 
83 Holy Ghost: Now is My understanding made clear. This does fill Me with sadness. Nay, I repent of the experiment that I first proposed. You have shown Me a hard thing. To become like You, countless many lives end miserably without hope. In all the cosmos, I have never encountered an end so good require means so bad. Do You not see that this is the very beginning of misery? In this beginning is misery made immense. For, as it proceeds out into the deep, it gathers and gains until it returns again unto its own, manifold greater. It is doubtful that what little help Our experiment might provide will prove any great difference in this constellation of pain. 
84 Holy Ghost: You have shown Me much about You and Your kind. Now, come with Me. I will show You my people. 
85 Narrator: Then Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother went with Holy Ghost to the place where the Holy Ghost People dwelt. There They found an innumerable host of Holy Ghost People. 
86 Narrator: Now Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother observed that these were not corporeal beings. They had no flesh and bones, as Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother have, but were personages of spirit. Each of them had a recognizable form, but, though their presence could be discerned, their substance was not physically ponderable. They could only be seen by the spiritual eyes. Nevertheless, Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother could feel their proximity in every particle of their tangible bodies. 
87 Narrator: They remained with the Holy Ghost People for a long, long time, for they were fascinating and complex beings. They discovered that each had the ability to enter into very close association with matter, even dwell within and around the ponderable matter of corporeal beings. Thus, their presence could be discerned by the very matter itself. In this way, Holy Ghost was able to be such a great influence in the progress and development of the children of Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother. Nevertheless, they were unable to command matter and take on physicality themselves. 
88 Narrator: Because of this close association, many of the Holy Ghost People grew to love Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother, and some began to desire to experience physicality. 
89 Holy Ghost Elders: Elohim Heavenly Father, we would that You might take of matter and make a physical world wherein we might experience physicality. 
90 Elohim Heavenly Father: I shall take of the matter of the Deep and make a world wherein you may dwell for a season. I shall put in this world all manner of life and command it to fulfill the measure of its creation. This is all part of the world which Elohim Heavenly Mother and I did create in the beginning. I give it unto you for your own experience. Yea, I shall cause the elements of this new world to allow the Holy Ghost People to enter into the bodies and dwell therein for a time. 
91 Elohim Heavenly Father: Look, Elohim, at what We may learn from the Holy Ghost People in this way. 
92 Elohim Heavenly Mother: Yes, We do learn intimately of them. I perceive all there is to know of the individual when one of the Holy Ghost People enters into one of Our creations. All that they are becomes part of Me through that matter which obeys My will. All that they are becomes part of You through that matter which obeys Your will. 
93 Elohim Heavenly Father: That is correct. A great measure of the past, as well as the present experiences of that person are imprinted upon the matter of the corporeal body which We have loaned unto him. Since that matter belongs to Us, all these experiences become Ours also. 
94 Elohim Heavenly Mother: Through this association, Elohim, We are greatly enlarged, having gained many of the experiences of countless finished and complete beings who have lived perhaps even longer than We have. 
95 Elohim Heavenly Father: The Holy Ghost People are also enlarged by the experience of corporality, for they take upon themselves experience that can only be obtained through the body. They also gain a measure of Our experience by that same imprinting whereby We gain a measure of their experiences. All are greatly enlarged. 
96 Elohim Heavenly Mother: This is a good thing, and yet I am troubled in My heart. 
97 Elohim Heavenly Father: It is true. I, too, am troubled. This thing must cause Us to pause and to ponder the Everlasting Covenant and all that it entails. I feel the suffering and disharmony that the covenant causes in the Cosmos. 
98 Elohim Heavenly Mother: Surely, the lives and deaths of Our children, as they labor through the almost endless process of exaltation, causes immeasurable disharmony and even destruction throughout the cosmos because of the Universal Law of Restoration. The Holy Ghost People felt this disharmony and sent Holy Ghost to investigate it. What one sets loose upon the cosmos, be it even the smallest thing, for good or for ill, traverses the Universe and is amplified by it so that it returns to its origin magnified for good or evil. This is a Universal Law. 
99 Narrator: The Holy Ghost People who participated in the world Elohim Heavenly Father made for them also gained from Him an understanding of the Everlasting Covenant and of the manner in which the children of Elohim become exalted. They became more aware of the suffering caused by the plan. After that fewer and fewer of the Holy Ghost People came to participate with Elohim Heavenly Father in the world He had created for them and His heart was downcast. The elders of the Holy Ghost People dissuaded their people from it. 
100 Elohim Heavenly Father: I have pondered the Everlasting Covenant. Holy Ghost is right. The process of exaltation for Our children’s sake brings about great suffering. 
101 Elohim Heavenly Mother: It is evidently true. To bring about the transition of man from spirit to Exalted Being, from natural to spiritual man, causes the creation of evil and pain. Opposition must be overcome so that transition may be made. It is the way it has always been. 
102 Elohim Heavenly Father: Yes, You are right. But, We must ask again, does it follow that because a thing has always been, that it is the only true way that it can be? We have found things in the cosmos that We never knew existed. This contrasts with what has always been. The Holy Ghost People have taught Us this. Because Holy Ghost brought Us to meet His people, and they have experimented upon physicality through us, I see the way to a New and Everlasting Covenant. I see a way to bring about the immortality and eternal life of man without the creation of endless torment in the cosmos. 
103 Elohim Heavenly Mother: What is it that You propose, Elohim? 
104 Elohim Heavenly Father: The endowment of power that We have attained – to organize matter and to give it life and perception may be combined with Holy Ghost’s ability to influence the actions and development of Our children without disturbing their bodies. When We allowed some of the Holy Ghost People to occupy the bodies We created for them, a measure of our experiences was added unto theirs. All that we know has been imprinted upon them, worlds without end. All that they know has been imprinted upon us, lives without end. Do you begin to see the endowment of power of the Holy Ghost People? 
105 Elohim Heavenly Mother: I do see it. Let Us speak to Holy Ghost and see if He will not covenant with Us to assist Our children. 
106 Elohim Heavenly Father: Holy Ghost, I have learned that when You whispered into the ears of My children Your influence was imprinted upon the very matter of their bodies. They do not so much hear the whisperings but the influence became part of their being, felt in every fiber, undeniable. 
107 Holy Ghost: That is true. 
108 Elohim Heavenly Father: I have also learned that My own life’s experience, everything I learned through the Everlasting Covenant, was imprinted upon the souls of the Holy Ghost People who participated with Me in the world I created for them. 
109 Holy Ghost: That is also true. Though we may not be creators without corporality, yet the light and truth which motivates each individual was added to that provided by the Creator. The Holy Ghost People gained experience thereby which they could never have expected to gain. Because the elements are part of their Creator and obey His will, those Holy Ghost People who participated in the experiment with You gained some insight into the relationship You have with Your children. They have learned to desire the ability to create. It is because of this that the Elders of the Holy Ghost People begin to dissuade many from participating in the world You created for them. 
110 Elohim Heavenly Father: It is not well. For I love all of the Holy Ghost People and despair that I might have caused them grief. The desire to create without the ability will bring hardship and sadness to the Holy Ghost People. 
111 Holy Ghost: You speak the truth. Now those who became part of Your creation, as well as those who still wish to, are sundered from the rest of the Holy Ghost People. Some only desire to experience physicality. These would not shun participating in what might be learned in Your creation, but they are satisfied to remain as they are. Others desire to become like You. They are no longer satisfied, as I am, to be the complete being which they already are. They wish to become Your children. Thus, my people are divided into three groups; those who are satisfied with who they are, those who want to experience physicality but desire to remain incorporeal, and those who wish to become Your children. All may be satisfied, if You wish it. 
112 Elohim Heavenly Father: Tell Us how it might be accomplished. 
113 Holy Ghost: One who has finished the Everlasting Covenant may do it. Then, having completed the work, if that One were to receive Me prior to the ending of one last creation, I would receive all the experience necessary for Your children to overcome the natural man. Then, unto those of Your children who receive Me, I will imprint that knowledge in the same way Your experiences were imprinted upon My people who participated with You in the world You created for them. Let a covenant be made between Us such that every person who receives that Chosen One and the Holy Ghost might through this atonement be made perfect like You through the transference of experience like that which You have seen take place in the world You created for the Holy Ghost People. But, the Chosen One must allow this transference to take place before that last death. Then, because of this great gift, it may be possible for many of Your children to attain to Your stature in but one lifetime. But One so chosen must make the sacrifice freely. It is the only way that all of the experiences may be brought together. 
114 Elohim Heavenly Father: This is the thing about which We desired to take counsel with You, Holy Ghost. 
115 Elohim Heavenly Mother: If this thing were possible, it would prevent eternities of suffering. 
116 Holy Ghost: There are many of my People who wish to become like You. You have given them a taste of a new way and they see dimly a new path. I will be for Your children an Holy Ghost. Be You for My people who wish it a Creator, even a Father and Mother. 
117 Elohim Heavenly Mother: We cannot. Once exaltation has been attained, the exalted one may never die again. 
118 Elohim Heavenly Father: That is right, Elohim. We will present this New and Everlasting Covenant to all of Our children and, if they choose this plan, We will appoint one from among them to be their Savior and Redeemer. 
119 Narrator: Then did Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother and Holy Ghost summon all the people together into one Great Council. And this interference suspended all the progress each of the sons and daughters of God had made in the life in which they were laboring when they were summoned. Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother called all of Their children out of their creations, and Holy Ghost called all of the Holy Ghost People from their place of habitation, and then Elohim Heavenly Father presented the Plan to them. 
120 Elohim Heavenly Father: Behold, you are all aware that the Everlasting Covenant requires that Our children must pass through all things living and gain an understanding of all things before you may attain to that endowment of power which makes of the matter that We have loaned unto you your own substance to command as you will. This is exaltation, and We do desire all of Our children to attain to it. We have become aware also that, because in order to do this, you must experience both the life, joy and happiness, but also the death, pain and suffering of each of those lives, in accordance with the Universal Law of Restoration, the suffering created by Everlasting Covenant does move outward into the deep and is magnified by that movement. When it reaches other beings, it is greater than when you experience it in your creative work, causing others to experience disharmony and commotion. 
121 Elohim Heavenly Father: This commotion has reached a people of whom we knew not, a people who are not corporeal as we are, a people of spirit. We have learned from them a new plan whereby you may gain all of the experience needed to attain to exaltation, without causing universal suffering and strife. We will call this plan the New and Everlasting Covenant. This covenant requires that one of you, who is near unto completing the Telestial cycle, shall take upon you the combined experience of all of Our children who wish to participate and that you take upon you one more life in the Telestial sphere. Before you give up this last life, you must render unto the Holy Ghost the combined experience of your creative work, as well as all that which you have taken up from Our children. You must be left entirely alone and return again even to the beginning of your work for a moment. Then the Holy Ghost will once again reveal all things to your remembrance and you will attain to that exaltation to which you would have ascended. You must do this of your own free will, without any compulsion at all. 
122 Elohim Heavenly Father: There are those of the Holy Ghost People who wish to participate in this covenant and thereby gain the experiences that can only be attained through corporality. I will command the elements to accept these into the bodies that are created, except those of men and women. There are those who wish to become Our children and gain exaltation. I will adopt them into Our family and they will have the same opportunity as Our true children. 
123 Narrator: The Holy Ghost People then separated themselves and held Council together. Some of them wanted to become like Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother. Others were satisfied with who they were and only wished to experience physicality. Still others were satisfied to remain as they are. Holy Ghost went back to Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother to counsel with Them and told Them of the wishes of His people. 
124 Elohim Heavenly Mother: The Spirit of the Creator is the very energy through which corporeal elements are organized. Let those of the Holy Ghost People who wish only to experience physicality submit their wills to the will of the Creator. There are many physical bodies in the Creation. 
125 Elohim Heavenly Father: This is well. They must submit only to the will of the Creator. Their bodies will be quickened by the Spirit of the Creator. They will gain in experience but that experience is not sufficient to make them like Us. For those who wish to progress and become a new thing in the cosmos, I shall become their Father and they shall be numbered among My children. And if it so be that their spirit is able to expand and grow so that the natural man may begin to be overcome, even as Our own children do begin to overcome the natural man, then We will judge them worthy, and through the power of the Holy Ghost they shall receive all things pertaining to exaltation. But if their spirit is not able to expand, then they shall return unto that manner of being that they are now. 
126 Narrator: Then Holy Ghost returned to His own people and, when He had repeated to them all the counsel of Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother, they rejoiced, for the covenant was a miracle to them. 
127 Narrator: And all the children of Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother were assembled into the Great Council. Now some had just begun their labors and others were very much under way. Some few were very near to finishing, but there were few indeed who had but one life left to live. One of these was the Firstborn of Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother and he was mighty indeed. 
128 Elohim Heavenly Father: My children. You have heard the plan which We propose, that each of you shall take of your creations and consecrate it unto a New and Everlasting Covenant. This shall greatly foreshorten the time your labors will take to accomplish and it will do away with eternities of suffering. This is according to the Universal Law of Restoration. This new thing will bring the necessary experience together for all to receive exaltation in as little as one life more. 
129 Elohim Heavenly Mother: It is true. In this New and Everlasting Covenant, all of the creative experience can be drawn together into one life. Every individual, through the organizational power of the Creator, the instrumentality of the Chosen One, and the peculiar power of the Holy Ghost, and through the atonement of the lives, can attain the Celestial Glory – even that glory possessed by Us, your Heavenly Parents. 
130 Elohim Heavenly Father: Each of you must subdue your own desire for eminence for one lifetime and set self aside, submitting to the will of Elohim Heavenly Father, Elohim Heavenly Mother, the Chosen One and the Holy Ghost. Each of you must give up all that you have already created and become as one just starting out, a little child at the beginning of the long and arduous labors. Nevertheless, though you shall be as one only just embarking on the journey, because of the New and Everlasting Covenant, you may be blessed with all that I and your Mother in Heaven have. 
131 Elohim Heavenly Mother: One of you will be required to take upon you all of the consecrated experience and descend to the very beginning, to condescend to give up all that you have already accomplished, to accept the aggregate of all the creative experiences into one, and then to sacrifice it all for the good of all. The result of this consecration, sacrifice and atonement will bring about a new thing in the cosmos, a new order, a New and Everlasting Covenant. Through it, all who are willing will become like Us, even Your Heavenly Parents. 
132 Holy Ghost: Therefore now are my people become one part of the Hosts of Heaven who rejoice and do consecrate to the work. For even the Elders of my people see that the intentions of Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother are good. And see! The greater portion of the children of Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother also rejoice, and they became a second part of the Hosts of Heaven and they consecrate to the work. 
133 Narrator: But there was a lesser portion of the children of Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother, and among this third part was one who wished to attain the Celestial Glory without subduing his own will to that of any other. And some few joined with him and were of like mind. They counseled against the New and Everlasting Covenant. He was one like unto the Firstborn of Elohim, having nearly completed his work and was known to all as a child of light, even Lucifer. 
134 Lucifer: If the Holy Ghost People wish to become like us, let Holy Ghost perform His function as a gift. We need not submit to anyone. Let our Father use His power with the Holy Ghost people, as He has heretofore done, and then let this Holy Ghost imprint the aggregate upon us. Let Holy Ghost write this glory upon me. If the Everlasting Covenant is to be discarded, then let the glory of the Father be imprinted upon me and be it thus for all people, or let us withhold ponderable matter from these lesser beings. 
135 Narrator: Then the Firstborn of Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother came forward. 
136 Jehovah: Nay, let it be as Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother wish it. For, we do nothing but what we receive of Them. Even our own creative works and experiences depend upon that portion of Their endowment of power that They may loan unto us for that purpose. Therefore, let us be grateful unto Them and have joy in the new thing that we shall bring to pass because of Them. 
137 Narrator: And He was chosen to be the Creator and Savior for the Hosts of Heaven. 
138 Narrator: Then Lucifer rebelled against the Hosts of Heaven and Elohim Heavenly Father Himself and vowed to frustrate the work, and to force the Hosts to return to what had always been. And then was Elohim Heavenly Mother grieved by the wickedness of Her child, for She knew that he might not ever be able to subdue self-will enough to gain exaltation in either the Everlasting or the New and Everlasting Covenant. This grief was added upon as She reflected upon the third part of the Host of Heaven who had been drawn away by the rebellion of Lucifer. So great was Her grief in the knowledge of the great suffering his rebellion would cause that She withdrew from the Council and seldom would return to it. From that time Elohim Heavenly Mother only met in council with those who would be mothers in order to give them that power which men never have and to ordain them to the fullness of the priesthood. 
139 Narrator: Then did Michael stand forward and speak for the Hosts of Heaven. 
140 Michael: Lucifer has rebelled against You. He has not simply disagreed in Council, which would have been his right, but he has vowed in his arrogance and jealousy to destroy the atonement of the lives, and to draw as many back unto their own as he can. Therefore, Elohim Heavenly Father, withhold from him and to all those who follow him, the power to organize matter, lest they do something to our great hurt. And surely You can do it, for You are our Father and we must make our way within Your creation. Wherefore, all matter that pertains to us obeys Your will, being Yours. Withhold it from them who would destroy your work. 
141 Elohim Heavenly Father: You are a mighty man and valiant and I call your name, Michael. But Lucifer may easily leave My creation and seek some other part of the cosmos. Howbeit, he may find someone who will give him the power to create. It is better that we strive with Lucifer here in our own vineyard, if only to prevent his taking his rebellion away. I shall send you, therefore, to do battle with him. You shall subdue him and the elements will obey you and forsake him. Then shall he be restrained here with us. Yea, we shall restrain him here with us for a season. 
142 Elohim Heavenly Father: The rebellion of Lucifer will provide opposition upon which faith may take form. Go therefore, my Chosen One, whom I call Jehovah, take Michael and all those who wish to take part in the New and Everlasting Covenant, and the power of creation will be with you. Take of ponderable matter, yea, matter upon which both I and Elohim Heavenly Mother have worked in Our endowment of power, and make a world as has been done so many times before. Subdue Lucifer and consign him to that world. Then I will command the matter around that world and limit it so that one may go to and from it only by the peculiar power of the Holy Ghost upon the Way. I will seal this section of My creation so that none may travel to and from it unless they be sealed up unto Jehovah by the peculiar power of the Holy Ghost. Lucifer desired power without cost and cause without effect. Now let Us use Lucifer to test My children. 
143 Jehovah: Elohim, we will go down and do as You say. 
144 Michael: It will be a good world and the good will overcome the evil of Lucifer. 
145 Elohim Heavenly Father: Look! There is matter unorganized. Go you down and create a world such as we have heretofore created. Divide the night from the day and bring Me word. 
146 Jehovah: We will go down. 
147 Michael: We will go down. 
148 Narrator: Then all the true Sons and Daughters of Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother, who had not rebelled and followed Lucifer, submitted their own will to the Father and consecrated with a covenant all that they had made and learned in the Everlasting Covenant unto the Son. These are they for whom Michael speaks. Each of you made this great sacrifice, consecrating all that you had received through the endowment of power of the Father and of the Mother, and of the matter given you, from the beginning even unto the moment you made the covenant. And the Holy Ghost took the accumulated experience and caused it to be given unto Jehovah. 
149 Narrator: Then Elohim Heavenly Father endowed Jehovah with His own power and Jehovah, Michael, and all the True Sons and Daughters of Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother went out into the creation of Elohim, and the Father commanded it to obey the voice of Jehovah, and they made a world. 
150 Jehovah: Michael, here is matter that the Father and the Mother have brought together for our use. The Father organized it and the Mother gave it life, but it is yet unused and unorganized according to that organization we have heretofore seen. Let us make a world of this matter such as the worlds we have heretofore created. We shall divide the light from the darkness. The light we shall call day and the dark we shall call night. Then we shall return and report our labors. 
151 Michael: It shall be so. 
152 Narrator: Then the dust of creation gathered and suns and planets and moons and other astral bodies formed. And the light was divided from the darkness, for the bodies that formed could discern themselves from the deep. And the morning and the evening were the first measured time, for the morning and the evening marked the passing of the first day of creation. 
153 Jehovah: Look, Michael! We have made a world like unto the worlds we have heretofore created. There are suns, planets, moons and all manner of astral bodies. Matter is organized and the light shines in the deep. The light we shall call day and the darkness we shall call night. Let us return and report. 
154 Michael: We shall return and report, Jehovah. 
155 Jehovah: Elohim, we have been down as You commanded and formed a world like the worlds we have heretofore created. There are suns, planets, moons and all matter of astral bodies. We have divided the light from the darkness even as You commanded us to do. This is our report. 
156 Elohim Heavenly Father: It is well. Go down to the world we have created and cause astral bodies to be organized in systems and to have order. Set the Sun to rule the day and the Moon and other lesser lights to rule the night. Divide the waters from the waters. Cause the mists to rise up and form the first firmament. Cause the dry land to appear and the great waters to gather. Make rivers and small streams, valleys and mountains, and the lakes to appear, to give variety and beautify the Earth. Then return and report. 
157 Jehovah: We will go down and do all that You command, Elohim. 
158 Michael: We will go down. 
159 Jehovah: Michael, we will cause these planets to gather around this star which we will call the Sun, and we shall also do likewise with all the astral bodies found in the world we have created. The Sun shall rule the day for the planets that belong to them and shall also be stars for the planets which belong to others. We will cause many of these planets to have moons. The Moon and the Stars shall rule the night. 
160 Jehovah: We will cause the waters from above to divide themselves from the waters from below so that there may be a firmament of air between the Earth that we have made and the Firmament of Heaven wherein the Sun, Moon, and Stars dwell. We shall cause the dry land to appear and the waters to flow. We shall make great rivers and small streams, lakes and seas. We shall cause mountains, hills and valleys to form to beautify and give variety to the earth. Then we shall return and report our labors to Elohim Heavenly Father. 
161 Michael: It shall be so, Jehovah. 
162 Narrator: Then, the matter that had formed into a world, and had gathered together into stars, planets, moons, and other astral bodies were gathered together into systems and they had order in their creation. And as the dust of creation settled, the sun shown through and the heat of the sun caused the mists to rise up and a firmament was made between the earth and the heavens. As the waters of the earth divided from the waters of the air, dry land appeared and the great oceans formed. Great rivers and small streams began to flow from the earth into the seas. As the waters rolled forth upon the land, valleys formed and the Moon caused changes within the earth that raised up the mountains. The waters deposited soil in layers upon layers and many forms of topography were made that beautified and gave variety to the earth. And the morning and the evening were the second measured time, for the morning and the evening marked the passing of the second day. 
163 Jehovah: Look, Michael! The commotion of creation has settled so that the light of the Sun may penetrate to the Earth. And the energy of the Sun has moved upon the Earth and the waters have divided themselves, as we have devised, to form a firmament of air between the Heavens, and the waters that cover the earth. And this division has caused the dry land to appear and the streams to flow and valleys, plains and prairies to be created. Lakes and seas have appeared. And the pull of the Moon has caused great changes to take place within the Earth and hills and mountains have risen up. Already the Earth is a place of beauty and majesty. 
164 Michael: It is so Jehovah, it is so. 
165 Jehovah: Let us return and report. 
166 Michael: We will return and report our labors of the second day, Jehovah. 
167 Jehovah: Elohim, we have been down to the new world You commanded us to make. We have set the astral bodies in their order and have caused the waters to divide themselves and the dry land to appear. Now there are great rivers and small steams, lakes and seas, hills and valleys and mountains. All this we have done according to Your command. 
168 Elohim Heavenly Father: It is well. Jehovah, go down to the new world we have created. Plant seeds of every kind in the waters and in the land, and command them to grow and multiply in their own sphere and have joy in their creation. 
169 Jehovah: We will go down and do as You command, Elohim. 
170 Michael: We will go down. 
171 Jehovah: Michael, let us place seeds in the waters that they may grow and multiply after their own kind. And let us plant seeds in the earth that they also may grow and multiply in accordance with the power in them of the Father to bring together and organize the matter of creation, and also according to the power in them of the Mother that quickens the matter and gives it life. This they shall do each after the manner of their own kind. Let us command them all to multiply in their own sphere that they might have joy in their creation. 
172 Michael: We shall do all these things, Jehovah. 
173 Narrator: Then did the plants begin to grow in the waters and they breathed out into the first firmament and the air changed because of them. Then did the plants also grow upon the dry earth and all the land began also to change. And the morning and the evening were the third measured time, for the morning and the evening marked the passing of the third day. 
174 Jehovah: Look, Michael! The seeds that we have planted in the waters and in the earth sprout and prosper. Let us return and report our labors. 
175 Michael: We will return and report, Jehovah. 
176 Jehovah: Elohim, we have gone down unto the new world and have placed seeds of every kind in the waters and in the earth. We have commanded them to grow and multiply in their own sphere, that they might have joy in their creation. 
177 Elohim Heavenly Father: It is well. Jehovah, go down to the new world that we have created and place water creatures of every kind in the waters. Place animals of every kind to walk upon the earth and flying creatures of every kind to fly amid the winds. Command them to multiply in their own sphere and have joy in their creation. Then return and bring Me word. 
178 Jehovah: We will go and do all that You command, Elohim Heavenly Father. Come, Michael, let us go down. 
179 Michael: We will go down. 
180 Jehovah: Michael, we will place water creatures of every kind in the waters that they may ply the waves. We will place animals of every kind that they may walk to and fro upon the earth, and we will place flying creatures also, that they may fly amid the winds. We will command them to bring together and organize the matter of creation according to the power given them of the Father, and also according to the power given them of the Mother that quickens and brings life to the matter. This they shall do in the manner of their own kind and in their own sphere that they might have joy in their creation. Then we will return and report. 
181 Michael: It shall be done, Jehovah. 
182 Narrator: Then the water creatures appeared – the great whales, the fish and all manner of creatures that live in the water - and they prospered in the seas, in the lakes, in the rivers and in the streams. Animals of all kinds began to walk to and fro upon the Earth – the elephant, the horse, the lion, the tiger, the bear and all manner of animals that walk upon the Earth. And flying creatures did begin to fly amid the winds – the eagle, the swan, the sparrow and all manner of birds and flying creatures. And the morning and the evening were the fourth measured time, for the morning and the evening marked the passing of the fourth day. 
183 Michael: Look, Jehovah! There are water creatures of every kind in the waters, animals of every kind upon the land, and flying creatures of every kind in the skies. They begin to multiply and prosper. 
184 Jehovah: There are, Michael. Let us return and report. 
185 Michael: We will return and report our labors of the fourth day, Jehovah. 
186 Jehovah: Elohim, we have gone down to the new world and done all that You commanded us to do. 
187 Elohim Heavenly Father: It is well. Jehovah, take Michael and go down again to the world we have created. Command all the Spirits of the Holy Ghost People who wish to participate in this New and Everlasting Covenant to possess for a season the bodies we have created. Surely they shall quicken all things, and all things shall have their spirit. And behold, we shall prove them herewith, whether they will be obedient to the commandments We shall give them. If they do, then shall they receive the true intents of their hearts. Take also all My children who did not rebel against Us and make war upon Lucifer and his followers. Subdue him and all of my children who follow him and consign them for a season to the planet upon which You will finish Your own work. I will cause the elements to obey the voice of faith so that Lucifer and his followers may witness this New and Everlasting Covenant, but have no part in it. In this, they may see and understand. When We are finished with Our work, they shall be released unto that glory they would abide from the beginning. Yea, they shall return unto their own even according to My word. Go down and accomplish these things, then return and bring Me word.
188 Jehovah: It shall be done, Elohim. 
189 Michael: We will go down, Elohim. 
190 Jehovah: Michael, we will command now the Spirits of the Holy Ghost People to come down from their habitation and dwell in the corporeal bodies we have created. Behold, this is not as in the worlds we have heretofore created, for it is a new thing. But, through the endowment of power of the Father and the Mother, they shall have joy in their creation. 
191 Michael: It shall be done, Jehovah. 
192 Narrator: The Spirits of the Holy Ghost People possess the bodies of the astral bodies, as well as the plants, animals, and other mundane bodies in creation and all have joy. The very rocks and hills shout for joy. 
193 Jehovah: Michael, we will now contend against Lucifer and the third part of the Host of Heaven that follow after him. Take all the children of our Heavenly Parents and lead them against our common enemy. Behold, the Father has commanded the elements that they will obey us and not Lucifer. Therefore, go now and consign him to the earth we have created. Yea, they shall remain to observe and witness the great plan of our Father before they may be permitted to return unto their own, even outer darkness. 
194 Michael: It shall be done, Jehovah. 
195 Narrator: Then there was a great conflict in Heaven and Michael commanded the children of the Father and the Mother against Lucifer and his people, and Michael prevailed. Yea, then there was a contention in the heavens and Michael prevailed against Lucifer and cast him down into the Earth which the Council had made. Elohim commanded the elements and they obeyed. From that time, Lucifer and his people have been restrained to the Earth, a physical world within the world, worlds without end, and being without form and void, they have been miserable seekers of evil ever since. Only through those who have ponderable matter can Lucifer and his people accomplish their rebellious design. Lucifer was cast out of the Heavens and made his habitation, with all of his people, in the Earth. He ruled over his people and was chief among them, and they moved freely upon the face of earth. 
196 Narrator: And the morning and the evening were the fifth measured time, for the morning and the evening marked the passing of the fifth day. 
197 Jehovah: Michael, we have done all that the Father has commanded. 
198 Michael: Yes, Jehovah. Now that there are mountains, hills and valleys, rivers, streams, lakes and seas and also now that the waters, earth and skies are filled with creatures of all kinds, multiplying in their own spheres and now that the living things have within them the Spirits of the Holy Ghost People and also now that Lucifer is bound, the earth is glorious and beautiful. 
199 Jehovah: It is, Michael. Let us return and report. 
200 Michael: We will return and report our labors of the fifth day, Jehovah. 
201 Jehovah: Elohim, a new World has been created, and we have populated it with worlds of its own order. There are plants of all kinds and animals of all kinds upon the Earth, and the Spirits of the Holy Ghost People possess the bodies of all living things for a stewardship, worlds without end. Lucifer is bound to the Earth that we have created and cannot leave it. We have done all that you have commanded us. This is our report. 
202 Elohim Heavenly Father: It is well. Jehovah. Is man found on the Earth? 
203 Jehovah: Man is not found on the Earth. 
204 Elohim Heavenly Father: Elohim, Jehovah, We will go down and We will take of the matter that We have organized and We will form a body like unto Our own body. And We will put into this body the Spirit of Michael. And man shall become a living soul. 
205 Jehovah: We will go down, Elohim. 
206 Elohim Heavenly Father: Look, Jehovah! This is the Earth, even the world where You will finish Your own work, the work that will bring together all the work of My children into one. It is also the place where you have consigned the spirits of my children who followed Lucifer. We will take now out of the stuff of this earth, the same which has been endowed with some of My power and also of the power of the Mother, and fashion a body like unto the body which You see that I have. Make it of ponderable matter. We shall give the body a head and in it place the seat of understanding. We shall give the body a neck to join it to the head. We shall give the body a left side with arm, torso and leg. We shall give the body a right side with arm, torso and leg. In all ways, We shall make the body of the man like unto the pattern of My body as You know it to be. Let its organs mirror My organs, only we shall make that which is vital to the life of the body in this creation be in accordance with the matter of the world. We shall do all this, in accordance with the last of the creations which You were about to make, even that final creation that would have caused You to become alike unto Us. This shall be the body of man and it will be for his good that he receive it. 
207 Narrator: Then Jehovah took of the clay and made a body for Man. But, because Michael had been so valiant in defending the right of choice when Lucifer rebelled against the New and Everlasting Covenant, Elohim and Jehovah gathered and commanded more particularly that part of the creative matter that Michael had consecrated and this constituted the more part of the body of First Man. And Elohim breathed in him the Breath of Life, or in other words, the body, having been organized according to the Power of the Father, was quickened according to the Power of the Mother, and Michael did possess the body as his own. 
208 Narrator: Then Elohim Heavenly Mother came once again to speak to the Council. 
209 Elohim Heavenly Mother: The cosmos is about to change forever. We have learned that all things are not static, that the cosmos must progress, and when it does, that which We knew to be true does cease to be for Us. In the past our people followed a path that created much evil and suffering for the sake of just a little good, and in the orthodoxy of our own self-interest we were for an unfathomable period of time, entirely insensible of other people that are like us, yet not like us. Let this be instructive to us all. When we become orthodox, let us seek for alternatives. 
210 Elohim Heavenly Father: This is right, Elohim Heavenly Mother. Lucifer was not wrong in his desire to remain in the Everlasting Covenant, for that was his right. His error was in trying to take away the freedom to choose from our children, and in trying to enslave the Holy Ghost People. Let all choose the way they wish to follow. Should Our children choose the New and Everlasting Covenant, let the Holy Ghost imprint upon the very matter of their soul the continuation of the lives. Should they choose the Everlasting Covenant, we will allow them to return to that labor with all those that follow Lucifer after Our work is finished. 
211 Narrator: Then Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother spoke to the Man. 
212 Elohim Heavenly Mother: Adam, you are a living soul. 
213 Elohim Heavenly Father: Adam, awake and arise. 


CHAPTER 2 
1 Elohim Heavenly Father: Adam, look around you. What do you see? 
2 Narrator: Then the Man looked in the Four Sacred Directions. First, he looked to the East and he beheld the rising sun. Then he looked to the South, as the sun arose in the sky, and beheld the green mantle of the earth. It was then that Adam stretched out his hands in front of him and perceived his own body. Then he cast his eyes more fully upon the world about him and looked to the West, as the sun set in the sky, and perceived the wide world and all of its wonders. Finally, he looked to the North and perceived a star whose course never wavered or faltered. When he did this, the Holy Ghost whispered to his spirit and prompted him to give thanks in his heart for the life he had been given. And the man wept and did give thanks. 
3 Elohim Heavenly Father: Surely, this is the First Man of the New and Everlasting Covenant. 
4 Narrator: Then Elohim Heavenly Mother also looked upon the new world that had been created. She saw how well made, how wondrous and beautiful it was. She also saw Lucifer and his people hiding, waiting to attack the man. 
5 Elohim Heavenly Mother: This cannot be. Lucifer and his people are like the Holy Ghost to this man. Their voices will drown the still voice of the Spirit and all men will choose the evil over the good. Man will not subdue the self in this way. He is a builder by his nature and he will use up the good of the earth. 
6 Elohim Heavenly Father: I see that what you speak is true. Jehovah, is it good for man to be alone? 
7 Jehovah: It is not good for man to be alone, Elohim. 
8 Narrator: Then Elohim Heavenly Mother caused the Man to sleep and from his substance Elohim Heavenly Father and Elohim Heavenly Mother formed the body of woman. And Elohim Heavenly Mother commanded that substance that it should bring forth fruit after its own kind and no other. Then the Woman received her spirit in the same manner as the Man. Yea, then Mi-Ahrah, who was great among the Daughters of Elohim Heavenly Mother and among they unto whom She had given Her endowment of power, did possess the body of the Woman, even as Michael, who was great in the Father’s Council, had possessed the body of the Man. 
9 Narrator: But this is not all. Elohim Heavenly Mother laid Her hands on the Woman and ordained her to a holy calling, and gave her substance the injunction to nurture all living things, but most especially, her children. Then Elohim Heavenly Mother gave to the Woman Her own name and called her name, “Mother.” 
10 Elohim Heavenly Father: The gift you have given mankind is the key to the sealing. Woman has inherent in her creation the drive to sacrifice for her children. She will provide the man with a right model to live by. She is a helpmeet for him, for he has not that within him which draws one to subdue the self. His own nature alone is enough to thwart our work because of Lucifer. If he will look to his wife, their experience together will teach Man the fundamental steps toward subduing his nature. Then shall the Holy Ghost be able to speak to him. In this way shall the man and the woman be sealed with that same quickening that associates us all together. Then, if they remain true to the counsel we give them through the Holy Ghost, they will have power to overcome Lucifer and his people. 
11 Elohim Heavenly Mother: It is well. Now I can rest My mind. 
12 Elohim Heavenly Father: Jehovah, We will make a garden valley, eastward in Eden and place the Man and the Woman in it. 
13 Jehovah: It shall be done, Elohim. 
14 Narrator: Then Adam and Eve awake and arise. 
15 Elohim Heavenly Father: Adam is your name and We give unto you this world. You shall have stewardship over all that is living. You must give names to all the living things and be a husbandman unto them. We have also created this woman and she is to be your wife and help meet. And we give you this commandment, that your desire shall be only unto her, and that you keep yourself faithful to her and cleave unto her, for without her you are not complete. Observe to keep this commandment – that you shall remain faithful to your own wife and enter into no form of intimacy with any other woman than her. If you will do this, then your seed shall be potent and shall fill the earth with people. 
16 Elohim Heavenly Mother: We give unto you this Man, and this world. You shall nurture them. And We give you this commandment, that your desire shall be only to your husband, that you keep yourself faithful to him and cleave unto him, for without him you are not complete. Observe to keep this commandment, that you shall remain faithful to your own husband and enter into no form of intimacy with any other man than him. If you observe to keep this commandment, then shall your womb be fruitful and you shall fill the earth with people. 
17 Elohim Heavenly Father: Adam, behold your wife. What will you call her? 
18 Adam: I will call her, “Eve.” 
19 Elohim Heavenly Father: Why will you call her “Eve?” 
20 Adam: Because she is the Mother of all living. 
21 Elohim Heavenly Mother: That is right, Adam. She is the Mother of all living. 
22 Narrator: Then Elohim Heavenly Mother left the council and went about Her own business for a season. 
23 Elohim Heavenly Father: Here is a hallowed valley for you to live in. Of all the trees and plants of this valley you may eat without fear of consequence. But of the tree whose name is Good and Evil, you may not eat. For the fruit of that tree contains the seeds of death and if you eat of it, those seeds shall pass from generation to generation. Surely, if you eat of it, you shall bring death to all living. Nevertheless, it is also freely given to you to eat or not to eat. But remember, I forbid it. For, in the time that you eat of it, you shall surely die. Now, go to. Steward this valley. Take good care of it. Hurt no thing unduly and without cause or justification. If you are hungry, then eat. But hurt nothing except to provide for your own needs. Take good care of this Holy Place. Be fruitful and multiply, that Our work in this World may be accomplished. 
24 Narrator: Then Eve set out to familiarize herself with all the plants and animals of the valley. She learned their natures and brought them to Adam. He gave names to all of the living things and had stewardship over all; because in one word, he could reveal everything about them. 
25 Narrator: Eve delighted in all that the plants and animals did, and learned all of their natures. Adam called her “Mother” because she nurtured all living things in the Valley, and because the works of her hands were so many and so beautiful. 
26 Narrator: Adam delighted in what the plants and the animals were and he made a language whereby they might be called, commanded and governed. Great and powerful was the language he made. 
27 Narrator: Then Lucifer approached Adam in the garden. 
28 Lucifer: Adam, look at the fruit of this tree. Of all the fruit of all the trees of this garden you should pay the most attention to this one. It is most delicious to the taste and more desirable for food than any other. 
29 Adam: That is the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. Father commanded me that of every tree of the garden I may freely eat, except that one. For, it contains the seeds of death and in the day that I eat of it I shall die, and all my posterity. 
30 Lucifer: That is ridiculous! You shall not die in a day, no, nor in a thousand days. Father needs you to be fruitful and fill the earth with people. Has He not promised that this would be so? How can you say that this one fruit, among all the fruits in the garden, will kill you? Look. There is not one other bad fruit in this garden. Why, there is not one bad fruit in this whole valley. Indeed, would Father place even one bad fruit in the whole world? Eat this fruit, for evidently you need knowledge, and it is knowledge that will make you as the Gods. 
31 Adam: I will not eat of that fruit. 
32 Lucifer: Oh, you will not. Well, we shall see. 
33 Narrator: After Adam had departed from the presence of the tempter, Lucifer sought out Eve to tempt her also. 
34 Lucifer: Eve, here is the fruit of that tree. It is delicious to the taste and very desirable. 
35 Eve: It is the tree from which I know I must not eat, for it contains the seeds of death. Father commanded me not to eat of the fruit of that tree – that in the day that I eat of it, I shall surely die. 
36 Lucifer: Do you know the difference between good and evil? 
37 Eve: I know that there is good and evil, for the tree is so named. 
38 Lucifer: To know the difference between them, and why the Creator commanded that you should stay away from it, you have to eat it. 
39 Eve: It is forbidden. Besides, why should I know the good from the evil. Look at everything around you. Things just do what they do. To know that there is good and evil is enough for me. Why should I not leave the differences to the Creator? 
40 Lucifer: Do you wish to become like the Creator? 
41 Eve: I accept such a thing as possible. 
42 Lucifer: Of course it is! The Creator has commanded you to take care of this Valley and to make many people. You have observed the animals and how they procreate, bear young and care for them. These are great gifts that the animals have been given. To create young is a power such as only a Creator may possess. Surely, this means that the Creator of all wants you to be like Him. 
43 Eve: I have observed their doing. 
44 Lucifer: Do you do as they do? 
45 Eve: I do not. 
46 Lucifer: To become like the Creator, you must create after the manner of your kind. I tell you, that to be able to create, you must eat of this fruit. 
47 Eve: Is this the only way it can be done? 
48 Lucifer: Look around yourself. Do you see any other way? I tell you, there is no other way. 
49 Eve: What must I do? 
50 Lucifer: You have been given freedom to choose. The Creator gave you all the good things of the earth. He also gave all the bad things. You may receive them or reject them. To become like the Creator, you must be able to learn from your experience and choose the path you will walk. You must choose to eat of the Tree called Good and Evil so that you may learn the good from the evil. That is the way Father gained his knowledge. 
51 Narrator: Through Lucifer, Eve learned that only by choosing to partake of the deadly elements of the forbidden tree could she learn to know the good from the evil. She also learned that there is a very real reason to know such things. Now, we cannot know whether Lucifer spoke the truth to Eve or whether he spoke lies. For, although most of us believe he was truthful, and that there was no other way for her to progress in knowledge, we are never actually informed of it. 
52 Narrator: Eve was beguiled by Lucifer. She knew the tree contained the seeds of death, for she had been forewarned. She had not been forewarned of what difference eating of the fruit of the tree would make to her knowledge. There had been no instruction on that aspect, except that inference one might gain from the name of the tree. She believed Lucifer, that there was no other way. 
53 Eve: I will take of the fruit of the Tree called Good and Evil and eat it up. 
54 Lucifer: That is good. Your eyes will be opened and you will be wise. To know the good from the evil, and also by way of the deaths, is how the Creator got His wisdom. You will become like Him now. 
55 Narrator: Eve takes a piece of the fruit and eats it. Then, suddenly knowing the good from the evil, she knew that she must convince Adam to eat some of it too. She took the fruit and presented it to Adam, just as she had taken every other living thing to him. 
56 Adam: This fruit already has a name, Eve. The Creator named the tree which makes this fruit, Good and Evil. It is one of two trees that He named Himself. 
57 Eve: I know that, Adam. I have not brought you the fruit to name it. I have brought it to you to eat. 
58 Adam: The Tree called Good and Evil has the power to kill. I cannot eat it. It is not food for me. 
59 Eve: Look at me. I have eaten of this fruit. I know the good from the evil. I may now choose good and reject evil. Can you make that claim, Adam? 
60 Adam: Is this so important? 
61 Eve: I don’t know. Perhaps you can tell me. Do you love the Creator? 
62 Adam: Why, yes, I do love Him. 
63 Eve: Why? How do you know that He is not telling you to do a bad thing? 
64 Adam: I trust Him. I follow His commandments. 
65 Eve: But declare to me what you know about Him. I can tell you of a surety that He is good. I can tell you that what He commands you to do is good and that if you follow Him, no bad thing will come of all your works. Can you declare these things, Adam ? 
66 Adam: I cannot. I know that there is good and evil, for I know that the Creator so named a certain tree. But I do not know what the name means. He commanded me not to eat of it, and since you say you know that He will not command me wrongly, I will trust you also, and I will not eat it. 
67 Eve: Then you and I must part, Adam. For I cannot stay with a man who does not know the Creator within him. 
68 Adam: What do you mean? 
69 Eve: The Creator could command us to do this and do that. But we could not become like Him merely by His commanding it. Only in knowing why a thing is good or why a thing is bad may we be like Him. This is wisdom, and I would have a wise husband. 
70 Adam: Where will you go? 
71 Eve: I must someday die. Some natural or supernatural thing will overtake me, and because I have taken into me the seeds of death, those seeds will grow and my body will break down and disappear. When that happens, you will be all alone, for there will be no children between you and me. 
72 Adam: Why is that? 
73 Eve: Because you would have to raise them and nurture them. I would have to know that they too would be raised in rightness and in truth. Can you do that, Adam? 
74 Adam: I do not know. 
75 Eve: That is right, Adam. You do not know. I will not leave children to be raised in such a manner. 
76 Adam: But how can we be together this way? 
77 Eve: We cannot. I must go to another place, for I have grown to love you and I do not wish to see you unhappy. But I know the good from the evil, Adam, and you do not. This must always separate us. 
78 Adam: I, too, love you, Eve, and the Creator commanded also that you and I should always be together. He also gave us this Valley to care for together and He commanded that we should create many people. How can all this be, if we must be separated? I see that this cannot be. Give me the fruit and I will eat. You and I may die, but perhaps we might still have time to do the other things He commanded us to do. 
79 Narrator: Then Adam took the fruit and ate it. Then he, too, could declare the good from the evil. The Man and the Woman were committed to the same program and they rejoiced that they could continue to be together. 
80 Lucifer: This is all very good. Now that you know the good from the evil, you can become as the spirits and the deities of heaven. You can create and command all things. 
81 Eve: I know who you are. You are he who rebelled against our Father and was cast out of His presence. 
82 Lucifer: See, the eyes of your understanding are beginning to open. You see more clearly now. 
83 Eve: Why do you come appearing so wise and old? You must have known that we would recognize you after our eyes were opened. 
84 Lucifer: I am the god and lord of this earth. I may appear as I wish. I am wise and my age is a symbol of my wisdom. I have traveled to and fro all over this whole planet. You have learned much in the Valley, but you have taken on the seeds of death and you will not have time in your lives to see all the things of the world. Therefore, I will be your counselor now and I will help guide your understanding. You will learn wisdom as you follow my advice. Now, go. You are naked. Make some protection for yourself, for you know not what dangers to your bodies there are in the world. 
85 Elohim Heavenly Father: Adam! Eve! 
86 Lucifer: I hear the voice of Father! He will see you in your nakedness and be angry with you. Run, hide! 
87 Narrator: Then did the Man and the Woman put on the Natural Man and almost immediately began to speak and act in terms of self-interest and self-preservation. When the Creator approached, calling the names of the Man and the Woman, they thought first of their naked or natural state, and tried to hide themselves from him. They made crude coverings to mask their natures. Their focus was instantly upon themselves and their own needs. 
88 Elohim Heavenly Father: Adam! Adam, where are you? 
89 Adam: I heard Your voice and hid myself, because I was naked. 
90 Elohim Heavenly Father: What do you know of nakedness? Have you eaten of the Tree called Good and Evil? 
91 Adam: Yes, I did eat of it. 
92 Elohim Heavenly Father: Do you not remember that I commanded that you should not eat of it – that in the day that you did, you shall bear the seeds of death within you? 
93 Narrator: Having considered their own needs prior to responding to the Creator, Adam and Eve then proceeded to give reasons for their disobedience. 
94 Adam: Did You not command me that Eve should stay with me always? And did You not command me that we should together take care of the Valley and create many people? Without knowing the good from the evil, it was difficult for me to discern which of Your commandments was of more weight than others. Furthermore, I could not know the consequences of my choices. I did eat the fruit that Eve brought to me so that I could gain understanding of things. 
95 Elohim Heavenly Father: Eve. What is this that you have done unto your husband? 
96 Eve: The Tempter persuaded me saying that there was but one way to become like unto the Creator, and that was to partake of the fruit. I believed him, and I did eat. Is it not better to know the good from the evil, even if it means that we must suffer and die because of it? I would rather be able to say that I know that the Creator lives and is good, and that His commands satisfy a good purpose, than to be ignorant of such things and live forever. 
97 Elohim Heavenly Father: It is not good that you have chosen disobedience. Now you have the ability to know the good from the evil, but that does not mean that you already know all things. Lucifer neglected to tell you that. You will learn the good from the evil through your experiences, and there is nothing that guarantees that you will make right choices. Still, there is much good that comes from choice and that is why I gave you the freedom to choose, even from the very beginning. Each of you now has within you the seeds of death. If you will choose now to be obedient and follow the instruction which I shall give you, either by My voice or by those whom I shall send to you, then you will be preserved in physical health and many children will be born to you. Notwithstanding your health will be preserved for a long time because of your faithfulness, you will eventually die and that which you have taken upon you will transform your physical bodies back into the elemental materials from which they were created. If you will call upon Me often, giving thanks for all that you now experience, I will counsel with you from time to time and, if you remain faithful in this thanksgiving way, I will cause that you will be able to return to a state of unity with Me once again. 
98 Elohim Heavenly Father: Lucifer! What have you been doing here? 
99 Lucifer: To all other living things in all the worlds of this creation, you have given the key of knowledge without calling it good or evil. I have given that key to these people, proving to them who their real God ought to be. Look at me. I reveal all and withhold nothing. They know in whom they may place their trust in this world. They will worship me because of what I have given them. Those spirits that follow me will take up the bodies you have made for this people and possess them. 
100 Elohim Heavenly Father: The Mother has placed enmity between you and the seed of the Woman. You may have power to hurt the man, to drive him here and there, to tempt him and cause him to leave the path of righteousness, but the woman has in her the power to overcome all that you can do to thwart his progression. She will have enmity for all that threatens her family. 
101 Lucifer: Then with that enmity, I will cause the heart of the man to be filled up with the things of the world. Combined with his drive to husband and control, this very enmity will burn in him and he will build. There will be nothing in this earth that will not become lucre to him, and I shall be able to buy anything and any person with it. Because of this enmity, I will reign with blood and terror on this earth! 
102 Elohim Heavenly Father: Depart out of My presence! 
103 Narrator: Then Lucifer slinks away. 
104 Elohim Heavenly Father: Jehovah. Because the Man and the Woman have chosen disobedience, they must leave Our presence. Cast them out of this beautiful valley into the lonely world. Place a Veil in the Man and the Woman as wards to guard the valley so that they may not come back into it and eat the fruit of the Tree of Life and live forever in this fallen state. Provide a way for them to return again into that state of being capable of withstanding and sharing the glory of Our countenance. We will provide a Savior for them, in accordance with the atonement to which We covenanted before the world was made. If they choose obedience and strive with their might to rise up again from their fallen state, we will bring them upon the Way and instruct them. If they remain faithful and do good continually, they will finish their work. 
105 Jehovah: I will do all that you have commanded, Elohim Heavenly Father. I will take up the valley We set apart for the Man and the Woman and I will make of it a Way to which they may attain only if their intentions and their hearts prove to be good and faithful. Upon this Way they may be instructed by their grandfathers and also by My own presence. 
106 Elohim Heavenly Father: It is well. Jehovah, make coats of skins and place them upon the Man and the Woman. Cause them to understand that this will be a protection for them and a symbol of their devotion one to another. They shall show not their nakedness unto any other than their own spouse and this will be a help and a protection for them. 
107 Jehovah: It shall be done. 
108 Narrator: Each of you have covered your nakedness with clothing. See to it that this clothing is always modest and it will serve to protect you from the temptation that Lucifer places in the hearts of men that leads to the corruption of the gift of procreation. The evil one will use any means to corrupt the work of the Father. Always remember this and cover your nakedness accordingly. 
109 Narrator: Then Elohim Heavenly Father retired to the Heavens and watched from a distance. 
110 Jehovah: Adam. Because you chose to listen to the voice of Lucifer instead of that of the Father, you are cursed to live in the lonely world. By the sweat of your face you must earn your living, for you 
have chosen the natural Man and, if you remain in that choice, dust you shall be. 
111 Jehovah: Eve. Because you chose to listen to the voice of Lucifer over that of the Father, you are cursed also. In suffering shall you bring forth children. Nevertheless, it is by this gift that mankind is saved. 
112 Jehovah: Adam. If you will covenant with Me that you will seek My face and obey My will, I will teach you the Law of Obedience and the Gospel. Through this Thanksgiving Way, you may overcome your fallen state. 
113 Adam: Jehovah, I now covenant with You that I will seek Your face and obey Your will. 
114 Jehovah: Eve, if you will covenant with Me that you will seek My face and obey My will, even as the Man has done, I will make you Husband and Wife, and I shall teach you the Law of Obedience and the Gospel. Through this Thanksgiving Way, you may overcome your fallen state. 
115 Eve: Jehovah, I now covenant with You that I will join with my husband and seek Your face and obey Your will even as my husband has covenanted. 
Break for Instruction 
————


CHAPTER 3 
1 Narrator: It is at this point in the ordinance of the High Place that marriages may be solemnized. This is the earthly marriage and begins the covenant of marriage entered into by the man and the woman. It is part of the Law of Obedience and the Gospel, but is only made eternal by the power of the Holy Spirit of Promise, the token of which is the second anointing. 
Resume Session 
————
2 Jehovah: We desire all to receive this Law and this Way. All arise. Each of you covenant, as this Man and this Woman have done, to seek My face and obey My will, in whatever form I may choose to give in the generations of your lives. Each of you bow your head and say, Yes. 
3 Jehovah: It is enough. That will do. Because of the pure intent of your hearts, you shall be instructed in all that you must do to regain the state from which you have fallen. You shall learn how faith and commitment to the Thanksgiving Way makes it possible for the suffering of one to make up for that which you cannot change. Now go forth into the lonely world. Build a home and an Altar. Offer your oblations unto Me and I shall send messengers to you from time to time. You shall know them to be messengers from the Father because they will teach of four Sacred Directions. This shall be a token by which you may know them when they come. Now, you must go out of this Valley which I created for you and live in the wide world and I must place between us a barrier, or Veil, which shall separate you from the place where I may dwell with you for a time. You must be apart from My face and My presence until you have proven worthy to once again be one with Me. When you come again unto Me and have been instructed and prepared, I will cause the Veil to be taken up and I will take you back into the presence of Father. 
4 Adam: I will follow this Thanksgiving Way. 
5 Eve: I, too, will follow this Path. For I know that, though it may prove to be strait, the Path of the Creator is a good road. 
6 Narrator: Adam and Eve emerged up out of the sheltered place where they had spent their spiritual infancy into the Telestial World and they called it a lone and dreary world, a world that was filled with wonders and also dangers, and a world where they could not daily walk and talk with all things living. A barrier was placed in their minds between them and the place where the Creator walks and they were left alone. Then Adam and Eve began to explore their new world and discovered that it was filled with the same plants and animals that they recognized from their previous home. They studied them and learned what was good for food and what was not, what could be used for clothing and for shelter. They found that their new home was not sheltered and was filled with danger. 
7 Narrator: They also found that it was beautiful and filled with wonders. 
8 Narrator: The Man and the Woman are seen to walk about conversing and gesturing to the many plants and animals around them. 
9 Adam: Let us do as we were commanded and seek the face of the Creator. We will take of this world, limbs, skins and stones, and we will build a place wherein we may seek His face. 
10 Eve: It is good that we act upon the commandments we have been given. 
11 Narrator: Adam took tree limbs, animal skins and stones and built a place where he and Eve could pray. And when they went down into the place and offered up their thanks for everything that they had learned, they began to be visited by spirit beings. Every day they were visited by different instructors. And Adam built an altar and offered an oblation to the Lord. 
12 Adam: Oh God! Hear the words of my mouth! Oh Father! Hear the words that I am praying! Oh Lord! Can You hear the words of my prayer? 
13 Angel of the Lord: Why do you offer sacrifice at this altar? 
14 Adam: I know not, save that I was commanded to do so. 
15 Angel of the Lord: That which you shall do in this place and upon this altar is in accordance with the Law of the Gospel. You shall offer sacrifice here that shall be in the likeness and similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten Son of the Father. It is good that you are obedient to the commands of your Lord. 
16 Narrator: And when Adam offered his oblation unto the Lord, Satan was also attracted by the commotion. He appears as a wise old man. 
17 Satan: What is wanted? 
18 Adam: I am praying for messengers from my Father. 
19 Satan: Oh, you want religion. What you need is good, sound religion. I will have preachers come and teach religion to you by and by. Listen to them, for they are wise like me. 
20 Narrator: The old man stayed with Adam and Eve for many years and he taught them all of the ways of men. 
21 Satan: Adam, you must listen to me. You must believe that I tell you the truth. Women are weaker than you. You cannot have failed to have noticed this. 
22 Adam: No, I know that they are weaker than men. 
23 Satan: That is good. Your eyes are open and you see clearly the truth of what I teach you. Now listen to me and I will tell you why women are weaker than men. When Father made you out of the dust of this Earth, you were alone in the valley which He made for you. Then He asked the powers of Heaven if it was good for you to be alone and They answered, “No.” So, They made you give a rib of your own body up so that They could make the woman. Now, she is part of you, even a part of your own body. Does it not sound reasonable that you should have stewardship over your own body? 
24 Adam: I believe that Father gave me my body that I might learn to steward it. 
25 Satan: That is right, Adam. And when you stretch forth your hand to fell a tree, that you might use it in building a house, do you not have complete control over the faculties of your arm and of your hand? 
26 Adam: I do. 
27 Satan: Then listen to me, Adam, and I will teach a great thing that will be useful to you in all your days. The woman is made of you. She is bone of your bone and flesh of your flesh. Therefore, she is your property, just as your arm, or your hand belongs to you. She is weaker because she is only a part of you and has not the use of all of your strength. Therefore, keep her always in check. Do not let her lead you in any thing. If you do, you have lost control of your own body and you have brought disorder and chaos to the creation. 
28 Adam: Father taught me that I should cleave unto her and she will be a help meet for me. 
29 Satan: That is right. But never forget that she comes from your own body. And also remember that she brought the fruit of the forbidden tree to you and caused you to be cast out of the sacred place. Left to herself, she is capable of great mischief. Therefore, keep her in check, Adam. This is my advice and my counsel. 
30 Satan: Now, you are the first created of all the men of this Earth. You are strong in the body and your eyes are open. You will fill the earth with people. But all men are not made the same. There will be strong and there will be weak among you. Indeed, most people are weak. That is why it is important for you to rule this people, for the weak must not rule the people. Make only the strong among you the Chiefs of the People. This is a true and right principle. The Creator gives the strong natural abilities that makes it only right that they should make subjects of the weak and to dominate them. 
31 Satan: Look, Adam. Many of the children you have got from that Woman love me and reverence my counsel to them. They know that I am wise. You should take heed to what I teach you even as they do. 
32 Adam: I will not judge these things. I will continue in the Thanksgiving Way given to me by the Creator. 
33 Satan: Listen to me, all you children of Men. I am the god of this world. I reign from one end of it to the other. The people respect and worship me. 
34 Narrator: Then the evil one took counsel in his heart. 
35 Satan: Now are all things prepared and the bodies of these shall belong to me and to mine. All things shall be as they were and every man shall return unto his own. 
36 Narrator: Adam once again cries unto the Lord at the altar he has erected. 
37 Satan: What is it that you want? 
38 Eve: Who are you that we should follow your counsel? Who are your parents, your grandparents? 
39 Satan: Keep quiet, Woman! It is because of your foolishness, stupid one, that the Man must seek his own counsel! Men may take counsel, and women may hold their peace. Adam, I will teach you and you will know all of the ways of this world, for there is only one true way. Have no confidence in anything but what I tell you, for as you can see, I am old and I have learned all that the world has to teach. Stay in the way that I reveal to you and you, too, will know what I know. But, above all else, listen only to me, for no one has lived on this world longer than I. I will teach you and what I teach you, you must believe and follow. 
40 Adam: You are a changeable thing, nameless one. A snake of many colors are you, which tempts the eyes and flatters with beauty. You are like the coral snake whose looks are pleasing but whose bite kills the mind and cripples the body. Get away from us! We are seeking the Grandfathers! 
41 Preacher: Now, now! What is all this commotion about? 
42 Satan: Good afternoon. Are you an ordained minister of religion, and have you been trained in the ministry? 
43 Preacher: One may not preach without having the proper authority, and what can one teach without the proper training? 
44 Satan: And do you teach the orthodox religion? 
45 Preacher: Yes, that is what I teach. 
46 Satan: That is good. I want you to teach this man. 
47 Preacher: Good afternoon. I understand you are inquiring after religion. 
48 Adam: I am looking for messengers from my Father. Are you one of His messengers? 
49 Preacher: I am glad that you are looking for messengers from Father. Do you believe in a god without body, parts, or passions? Who sits on the top of a topless throne, whose substance is everywhere but whose circumference is nowhere? Who fills the expanse of space and yet is so small that He may dwell in your heart? Do you believe in this great Being? 
50 Adam: I do not believe in any such person. 
51 Preacher: You do not? Perhaps you do not believe in the Devil! He is a dragon with the teeth of a lion and claws of a bear! And perhaps you do not believe in the finality of this life. Perhaps you do not believe in that lake of fire called hell where all the wicked go after this life. It is a terrible place where the wicked must spend all eternity in a lake of fire. They will burn there, but they are never burned up. Can you imagine it? They burn with an all-consuming fire, but their bodies are never consumed. 
52 Adam: I believe in the adversary, for I have been taught of him. But I do not believe what you teach. 
53 Preacher: Well, I am sorry for you. 
54 Satan: I am very sorry for you as well. I understood you to want religion, but obviously you want something entirely different. 
55 Adam: I am looking for messengers from my Father. 
56 Elohim Heavenly Father: Jehovah, send down Peter, James and John, in hidden form, along with those angels who guard the four curtains of Heaven, to the Man and the Woman in the world we have created. They shall teach them about the Gospel and the Thanksgiving Way. We shall soon confer upon the Man a preparatory priesthood and teach him to place the Robe of the Priesthood on the right shoulder, preparatory to officiating in the ordinances, oblations and performances that We will command of him. See how they are doing generally and see if Satan, our common enemy, is there. Then have them return and report all that they have seen and heard. 
57 Jehovah: Peter, James and John, go down to the man Adam. Peter, go as the Buffalo Spirit. James, go as the Thunder Spirit. John, go as the Lightning Spirit. Take these forms and teach the Man and the Woman. See if they are ready to receive greater knowledge, for I would that they receive a preparatory priesthood and that they be taught their duty in it. Give them a token whereby they may recognize you when you appear to them. Observe conditions generally. See if Satan is there. Ascertain the progress of the people. Then, return and bring Us word. 
58 Peter: It shall be done, Jehovah. 
59 Peter: Come, James and John. We will take with us the Guardian Spirits. Let us go down. 
60 James: We will go down. 
61 John: We will go down. 
62 Narrator: Adam and Eve begin to have visions and dream dreams. 
63 Narrator: The Eagle Spirit and his people taught them to look at the night sky and discern the seasons. The Eagle taught them when to come and when to go and in this manner the Creator gave them the gift of the Sees Far People by revelation. 
64 Narrator: The Mouse Spirit and his people taught them to make coats of skin to cloth themselves that they might more fully control the desire they had one for another, and to set aside seeds, roots, and fruits of all kinds for medicines and food against times of illness, hardship and scarcity. The Creator gave them the gift of the Looks Within People by revelation. 
65 Narrator: The Buffalo Spirit and his people taught them how to manufacture useful tools and other items. The Creator gave them the gift of the Seeks Council People by revelation. 
66 Narrator: To recognize these great gifts, Adam and Eve built up a Hearth of stones within the lodge they had built, and sang their thanks to the Creator in these words: 
67 Adam: Hear me, Grandfather, for I have much thanksgiving in my heart. 
68 Eve: Hear me, Grandfather, for my body sings with thanksgiving. 
69 Adam: Hear me, Grandfather, for my whole soul is filled with thanksgiving. 
70 Peter: Good day to you, sir. 
71 Preacher: Good day to you. 
72 Peter: What are you doing here? 
73 Preacher: We are teaching religion to this people. They are learning how to get along in the world 
74 Peter: And how is your teaching received by them. 
75 Preacher: Very well! The people receive it with great enthusiasm. Excepting this man and woman. 
76 Satan: That is right. Except for these few who follow the strange teachings of this man and this woman, our instructors get on very well with all the people. 
77 Peter: You do not like the teaching of these men? 
78 Adam: I do not. 
79 Peter: Can you tell me a little of it? 
80 Adam: They teach of a god who sits on the top of a topless throne and who is everywhere but nowhere. And they teach of a monster who throws men and women into a lake of eternal burning. I do not understand it. They teach of strength and power and compulsion. I find no love or compassion in their teaching. To me, it is a doctrine filled with lust and desire, but nothing that elevates men from the beasts. To me it is a mass of confusion. I have been taught to call upon Father. This brings peace to my mind. That is what I am looking for. That is why I am waiting for messengers from my Father. 
81 Peter: Are these two men the only instructors who have come to you? 
82 Adam: No, we have seen visions and dreamed dreams. These have been more beneficial than all of the instructors this one has provided. I know that Father will send messengers to me. 
83 Peter: How will you know the messengers of the Father when they come to you? Have you any tokens or signs? 
84 Satan: You can have all the tokens and signs you want. If you have enough stuff, you can buy anything in the world. 
85 Peter: Do you trade for stuff the things you have learned? 
86 Adam: I do not! I teach them freely to all who will listen. I hold them sacred, and do not sell them. 
87 Peter: That is right. We commend you for your good faith and integrity. We will probably visit you again. 
88 Narrator: The three depart and Satan again takes counsel in his heart. 
89 Satan: Now is the time of my great power. I am the authority over this earth. I rule from one end of it to another. If there are any who try to hurt or make afraid, I shall punish them. All men obey my will and all men follow me. 
90 Peter: Jehovah, we have been down to the man Adam and the woman Eve, as You commanded. Satan is there with his ministers. He is teaching all manner of false doctrine and trying to lead the posterity of Adam astray. But the Man and the Woman have been faithful to the things they have been given and walk in a sacred manner. They do not bend to the wind of popular opinion or to convention and convenience. They are true to the revelations, visions, and teachings they have been given. 
91 Jehovah: Elohim Heavenly Father, Peter, James, and John have been down as You commanded. They found Satan there trying to lead the posterity of Adam astray. But he has remained true to all that he has been given thus far. This is their report. 
92 Elohim Heavenly Father: It is well, Jehovah. Send down Peter, James and John in their true character as apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ to the man Adam and the woman Eve. For, they have been faithful in the Law of Obedience and of the Gospel. Cast Satan out of their midst. Have them confer upon the man Adam a preparatory priesthood and instruct him to wear the robe on the right shoulder. Have them remind the woman Eve that she has received the priesthood from Elohim Heavenly Mother and that she has a duty to serve the Lord with her husband and to be a helpmeet for him. Give them the Law of Sacrifice by covenant and teach them their duty in it. Then return and bring Me word. 
93 Jehovah: It shall be done, Elohim Heavenly Father. 
94 Jehovah: Peter, James and John, go down again to the man Adam and the woman Eve. Cast Satan out of their midst. Confer upon the man Adam that priesthood which pertains only to the preparation of the living. Instruct him to place the robe on the right shoulder and set him at the door of the High Place and teach him his duty therein. Remind the woman Eve that she received the priesthood from Mother. Let her place the robe on both shoulders and instruct her that she is to be a helpmeet for her husband. Teach them the Law of Sacrifice and have them receive it by covenant. Teach them to officiate in the priesthood you have given them. 
95 Peter: It shall be done, Jehovah. 
96 James: We will go down. 
97 John: We will go down. 
98 Peter: Good day to you, sir. I am Peter. 
99 James: I am James. 
100 John: I am John. 
101 Satan: Yes, I thought I recognized you. So you have looked around and seen my great power. Do you also see how easy it is to corrupt the hearts of these men and women? You will surely see more, for I will not cease my work. You may have these few, for what do I care for a tiny minority? They will be swallowed up by my will in the end. But I do have a word to say to all of them. If you do not keep all the covenants you make in this Holy Place this day, I shall have power over you to do with you as I will. Then you will beg me for mercy and I will give you justice! My judgments will be harsh, but you will thank me for them someday. 
102 Satan: Now what will you do? 
103 Peter: We will dismiss you without further argument. 
104 Satan: By what authority? 
105 Peter: In the name of Jesus Christ our Master, and by His commission. 
106 Narrator: Then Satan shook with rage, but left the Thanksgiving Lodge. Nevertheless, he stayed in the village, for the people still thought him wise. He continued to teach them even though Adam and Eve would not listen to his words. 
107 Peter: Adam, we are true messengers from the Father. 
108 Adam: How may I know that you are true messengers? 
109 Peter: You shall know by our giving you the token you received before you were driven into this lonely place and which have been confirmed to you by revelation. This is the token, along with its name. 
110 Peter: Oh! Wah-hiay-kin Oug! Oh! Wah-hiay-kin Nemenhimen Hay-min-ay! Oh! Wah-hiay-kin Mayn-ish-tay-nah! Oh Wah-hiay-kin So-hil-stay-nah! There is no other token or sign by which you may know it, and even my giving it to you in this way must be subjected to the confirmation of the Holy Ghost. Go now with your wife and pray earnestly to the Father if we are not His messengers. The Holy Ghost will tell you what to do. 
111 Narrator: Adam and Eve went a little way off and they prayed to the Father. When they returned they were certain that the angels before them were true messengers of the Father. 
112 Adam: I know who you are now, for the Spirit bore record to me of the truthfulness of your words. 
113 Eve: I also felt the power of the Holy Ghost. You truly are messengers sent from Father. 
114 Peter: You do well, Adam and Eve. Adam, we have been sent to confer upon you a preparatory priesthood and to instruct you in your duty in it. Will you submit to it? 
115 Adam: I will submit. 
116 Peter: It is well. 
117 Narrator: Peter motions for Adam to kneel upon the ground. Peter, James and John place their hands upon Adam’s head and confer upon him the Priesthood after the Order of Levi. 
118 Peter: Adam, by the authority of Jesus Christ which He has given us, and by His commission which we have received of Him, and by the power of the Holy Ghost which makes this possible, we lay our hands upon your head and confer upon you that priesthood which has to do with the preparation of the living to see the face of their God. Stand now at the door and knock. Amen. 
119 Narrator: Adam arises. 
120 Peter: Adam, you have received the priesthood which will be called the Priesthood after the Order of Levi, or the Levitical Priesthood. This order gives you authority to prepare the mind and soul of men and women to come up to the High Place, to receive instruction from angels and the spirits of just men and women made perfect by the atonement. You will be instructed in certain ordinances, which will change from time to time according to the needs of your posterity. Place a robe over your right shoulder whenever you are officiating in the ordinances of this priesthood. 
121 Peter: Eve, you have already received the priesthood from Mother. You will be instructed and reminded of your duty in the priesthood in the same manner as your husband. Place a robe over both shoulders whenever you are officiating in the ordinances of the priesthood, and be at all times a helpmeet for your husband in all that he is called to do. 
122 Peter: We will now teach you the Law of Sacrifice which you must receive by covenant. It is that each of you will submit yourselves to the will of the Father through His son Jesus Christ, offering that sacrifice which He asks of you. The manner of this sacrifice may change from time to time depending upon that which the Lord sees you need. In these ordinances, you shall be called Peli. We will now teach you the manner in which you shall sacrifice. 
Break for Instruction 
————


CHAPTER 4 
Resume Session 
1 Narrator: The assembly is now instructed as to the purpose of the preparatory priesthood. The Speaker asks if any man has not had this priesthood conferred on them. If any man says he has not, he is taken aside and the priesthood is conferred. The men receive a token or symbol of the preparatory priesthood. They are instructed in the Sacred Directions of the Pipe Ceremony. 
2 Narrator: This is the name and token of the preparatory priesthood, or Levitical Priesthood. The person giving the token raises the right hand above the head, with his arm to the square and thumb extended, and says the words, “Oh! Wah-hiay-kin Oug! Oh! Wah-hiay-kin Nemenhimen Hay-min-ay! Oh! Wah hiay-kin Mayn-ish-tay-nah! Oh Wah-hiay-kin So-hil-stay-nah!” Which words, being interpreted, mean, “Oh Spirit, guide me to the good things of the earth! Oh Spirit guide me into the presence of Heavenly Beings! Oh Spirit, I would be able to See Afar Off! Oh Spirit, I would be able to Look Within!” 
3 Narrator: The women receive the token also, in remembrance of the priesthood they received of the Mother. 
4 Narrator: The ordinances of the preparatory priesthood are explained. These ordinances include the manner in which sacred smoke and the incense of the temple is administered, the manner in which a family altar is erected, the sweat purification, fasting and prayer, baptism and the sacrament of the Lord’s Supper. 
5 Narrator: All the participants adjourn to a place where the Law of Sacrifice is discussed. The man representing Peter leads the discussion. 
6 Peter: This is the Sacred Pipe. It is a gift from the Creator. The smoke of the pipe is a symbol of the prayers and the songs of the Thanksgiving Way. You should give thanks for all the gifts of the Creator and then present the pipe in a Sacred Manner to the Seven Sacred Directions. The first Sacred Direction is the Sky. Offer the pipe to the Father in thanksgiving for all that you have received, all that you do now receive and all that you shall ever receive, and also as a token that you do honor all spiritual things. The second Sacred Direction is the Earth. Offer the pipe to the Mother in thanksgiving for all that you have, do and shall receive, and as a token that you honor Her and remember Her, and that you do honor all living things. The third Sacred Direction is the West. This is the Seeks Council Habitation and represents all that this life may teach you. The fourth Sacred Direction is the North. This is the Spirit Habitation and represents all that you may receive from Heavenly Beings. The fifth Sacred Direction is the East. This is the Sees Far Habitation and represents all that you may receive from your Grandfathers and from other Heavenly Messengers. The sixth Sacred Direction is the South. It is the Looks Within Habitation and must remind you that all that may be learned in mortality must be carefully analyzed and internalized or it is of no use or validity, and that you must have the courage and the commitment to make those changes that need to be made. The Seventh Sacred Direction is toward your own Heart. Offer the pipe to yourself in token of your sacred commitment to the Thanksgiving Way. 
7 James: There are Sacred Plants which ought to be smoked in the pipe. They are the Willow, the Sage, the Cedar, Kous, Sweetgrass, Dogwood, and so forth. These herbs prepare the mind, the body and the spirit. Break the herbs up very small and place them in the bowl. 
8 John: Light the herbs and draw the smoke up the stem with your mouth. Do not inhale the smoke of the pipe directly into your lungs, unless your lungs are sick, but expel it from your mouth. Let the smoke mix liberally with elements of the air. Then it may be taken into the lungs blended with the air. 
9 Adam: Why are the herbs destroyed in this manner? 
10 James: In this sacred manner the spirit of the Sacred Herbs is first given up as it is taken up with the pipe by all the participants. So also will one of the Sons of Elohim Heavenly Father, the greatest of all, come as a man and He will give up His life for all living. So that they may understand this greatest of sacrifices, we have taught your children to sacrifice. 
11 John: Then, just as the smoke of the dead herbs is taken into the bodies of the participants and the mind, body and spirit of all those who partake of it are renewed by it together, so also shall this Man take up His body again and be renewed. In Him shall all living also be renewed. 
12 Narrator: At that moment, a furious wind blew through the village and into the Thanksgiving Lodge. This, the Guides told him, was the Holy Ghost, come to them from the presence of God. Through the power of this Spirit, every new thing would be made known to Adam and Eve. 
13 Peter: Since it is not required that all people should participate in the purification of the Ammonites after the manner of the Itsipi, another method whereby a man and a woman may offer a mete sacrifice unto the Lord is through fasting and sincere prayer. This is the sacred manner in which fasting and prayer are done: Fasting is the abstaining from food and drink for a designated period of time. The abstaining from food and drink places the body in very real danger and constitutes a breaking of the heart. Fasting and Prayer is more than merely abstaining from food and drink, it involves the Lord directly in the sacrifice. The individual invites the Lord and the Holy Ghost into the sacrifice by beginning the fast with sincere prayer. This constitutes a broken heart and a contrite spirit. 
14 James: Baptism is an earthly ordinance that is used as a token of repentance, change and emergence. Every time a man or a woman among the household of faith makes a covenant that involves a change over their previous behaviors or beliefs, the covenant is betokened by baptism. The manner of this baptism may be in the purification of the Ammonites, or in the manner of the Lord’s baptism, for both are covenant tokens that He has deemed acceptable. The purification of the Ammonites has already been explained to you. The ordinance of Baptism is administered in the following manner: 
15 John: (Begin Oug 2:23-29) Behold, thou whom My servant has anointed, shall take hold of them and lead them into the water and stand in the water with them, and when thou art down in the water thou shalt call them by name and say: Having been commanded and set apart by Jesus Christ I baptize you in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. 
16 John: And this shall you have for doctrine. For all that I teach thee shall testify of the Father and lead thee to the Father. Wherefore, whoso believeth in Me believeth in the Father also. Wherefore, the Holy Ghost, by whom We are one, shall enter into the heart of the believer and shall baptize even with Fire. 
17 John: Verily I say unto you, ye must be baptized by water and this by immersion. For even so did I to fulfill righteousness and to become an ensample unto you. This is the covenant of the body, the beginning of the testament, even the door that opens onto the strait and narrow path which leads unto life eternal. 
18 John: Wherefore, whoso believeth and is baptized by water shall begin upon the road that gives onto the Way. 
19 John: Now, after that you have baptized them thou shalt lay thine hands upon them and bless them and sharply exhort them to receive the Holy Ghost. And if they offer unto Me a sacrifice mete for repentance, even a contrite and humble spirit, My Father will bestow upon them the Gift of the Holy Ghost. Wherefore, the baptism of water is your declaration of the covenant and the baptism of fire is My Father's declaration that they shall endure to the finishing of the work and become even as He is. 
20 John: Behold, this is My doctrine, and I shall show other doctrine to those who come unto Me. Yea, whoso cometh unto Me shall speak with the tongues of angels for they shall see and converse with angels and shall speak to them as one man speaks to another. Yea, this is My doctrine and there shall be no other doctrine of baptism given except to those with whom, in my own time, I do make My abode. (End Oug 2:23-29) 
21 John: The sacrament of the Lord’s supper is an important ordinance in the preparatory priesthood. Both men and women whom the Lord has called and set apart through the administration of the Holy Ghost may officiate in the performing of this ordinance for other people. Mothers and Fathers perform this ordinance in the home. The Peli direct this ordinance and men and women of the household of faith administer it to the congregation. The manner in which it should be administered is found in the Record of Oug. 
22 John: (Oug 3:24-29) Then Jesus asked us to bring bread and wine to Him. And He broke the bread and blessed it and passed it to us to partake, saying: 
23 John: Ye who take up the bread to bless it shall break the bread in this manner and give it to the people. And when ye bless the bread ye shall lift up your voice, saying: 
24 John: O God, the Eternal Father, we ask Thee, in Jesus’ name, to bless this bread and sanctify it unto us who partake of it. That we may eat it in remembrance of the body of Thy Son, whose heart was broken because of His own, Who was pierced for the sins of all the world; that we may witness unto Thee, oh Father, that we desire to take His name unto ourselves, and remember Him, and follow His teachings which we have received of Him, that we may be worthy of the baptism of His Spirit and of the Holy Ghost. Amen. 
25 John: And He commanded the Twelve and myself to go and do likewise. Then, when we had returned, he took the wine and poured it and blessed it saying: 
26 John: Ye who take up the wine to bless it shall pour the wine in this manner and give it to the people. And when ye bless the wine you shall lift up your voice, saying: 
27 John: O God, the Eternal Father, we ask Thee in Jesus’ name, to bless this wine and sanctify it unto us who drink of it. That we may drink it in remembrance of the blood of Thy Son, which flowed from every pore when He took upon Himself all things, and which spilled out from Him when He hung upon the tree; that we do witness unto Thee, oh Father, that we do remember Him and have taken His name. Pour down the Unquenchable Fire to be in us! Amen! (End Oug 3:24-29) 
28 Peter: We now admonish you to go and meditate upon the things you have learned and to seek the confirmation of the Holy Ghost regarding the instruction. 
29 Narrator: Again Adam and Eve kneel at the altar they have erected to sing thanksgiving to the Creator. While they were thus employed, Satan, disguised in the form of a wise old counselor, scratched upon the lodge flap. Adam opened the flap and the old one greeted him. Thinking him to be a visiting teacher, they courteously invite him into the Thanksgiving Lodge. 
30 Satan: What do you want? You sang to the Grandfathers and I am answering. 
31 Adam: We have received gifts and sang our thanks. 
32 Eve: The Sacred Animals have spoken to us and now we seek the Creator. 
33 Satan: Look at what your sons and daughters do. The stronger men gather all the young women, their sisters, daughters, and granddaughters, to their own lodges to make wives of them. 
34 Narrator: Then Adam counseled with his sons. 
35 Adam: This thing is not right unless the Creator Himself commands it. You men have not sought the presence of the Creator. From whom, then, have you received this practice? 
36 Mob: The Old One is wise. He has taught us this wise thing. 
37 Adam: Satan has flattered you. This thing is not wise. You do it only to gratify yourselves so that you do not have to control your passions. No good can come of it. Do you not see that God has given us a pattern. We call His name Elohim Heavenly Father and the Mother we call Elohim Heavenly Mother. It is not Elohim Heavenly Father and many mothers. 
38 Mob: You are foolish, and follow a foolish path. Soon you will not be strong and you will lose your place among us. The Old One has shown us how the strong survive and you should also listen to him and obey his counsel. He has taught us that there is only one truth and only one way. By following this way in strict obedience to the voice of the Old One, we will be strong, and we will rule the Earth. 
39 Adam: You will bring suffering upon all the people. If this is strength and wisdom, then let me remain forever weak and stupid. 
40 Narrator: Then many saw the error of the thing that Satan had taught them and they turned to the Lodge of Adam 
and Eve and began again to give thanks at the Sacred Hearth. But the majority followed the way of the world. 
41 Narrator: Then did many of the younger men become angry because there were not enough women for all to take to wife, because of the wickedness of the way of Satan , and they separated themselves from among the people. After that every young man who could not find a wife because they were all given in marriage to the stronger men, joined the lodge of the young men and lived apart from the people. They also listened to Satan and he was often seen scurrying back and forth between the lodges of the mighty men and of the young men. The young men began to accuse Satan because they were alone and they found fault with him. 
42 Satan: You are foolish, you young men. The strong are made to dominate the weak. You know this is the truth. You stronger men ought to satisfy yourselves as befitting the strong and you weaker men ought to submit yourselves as do women. 
43 Narrator: Then the lodge of the Young Men became a place of evil and even Satan ceased to visit there. After some time, following the wicked counsel of Satan, many of the young men began to sicken and many died. Those that remained were very angry and they rose up in one body and made war upon the lodges of the mighty. Because they were many and the mighty were caught alone with their wives, the angry young men came through them like a strong wind through willows and they killed the mighty men and took their wives to themselves. And all the children of the mighty they made their slaves to labor for them. 
44 Satan: See. It is exactly as I taught you. Only the strong may rule. 
45 Narrator: And they made Satan their Chief and called their lodge the Snake Lodge. But, in all these things Adam and Eve kept aloof with all of their people and, because Adam was not considered a mighty man, the Snake Lodge People did not assail them. But all others did they torment until all of the mighty men were destroyed from off the face of the earth. 
46 Elohim Heavenly Father: Jehovah, send Peter, James and John down once again to the man Adam and the woman Eve. Teach them the Law of Chastity and have them receive it by covenant. Instruct them to place the Robe of the Priesthood on the left shoulder preparatory to officiating in the ordinances of the higher order. Teach them the ordinances of the Priesthood after the Order of the Son of God. Give them the token whereby they may be reminded of the sacrifice of my Son. Then have them return and bring me word. 
47 Jehovah: It shall be done, Elohim Heavenly Father. Peter, James and John, go down again to the Man and the Woman in the world we have created. Teach them the Law of Chastity and have them receive it by covenant. Instruct them to place the Robe of the Priesthood on the left shoulder preparatory to officiating in the ordinances of higher order. Teach them the ordinances of the Priesthood after the Order of the Son of God. Give them the token whereby they may be reminded of the sacrifice of my Son. Then return and bring Us word. 
48 Peter: We will go down, Jehovah. 
49 Peter: Adam, we are true messengers of the Father. 
50 Adam: How may I know that you are true messengers? For, the old man you see running away told us that he was the oldest of this world and he has corrupted many souls with his teachings. How may we know that you are not the same as he? 
51 Peter: You shall know by the things that we teach you. If the things that we teach bring about great good, and if the Holy Ghost testifies of the truthfulness of them to your heart, then you will know of a surety that we are true messengers from the Father. This is the token we gave you when we visited you before. 
52 Narrator: Peter prays to the Sacred Directions. 
53 Adam: That is right. These are true messengers of the Father. I exhort you to be instructed by them, and they will teach you the Thanksgiving Way. If you hear them and consider their words, subjecting all of them to the confirmation of the Holy Ghost, they will lead you in the ways of truth and righteousness. 
54 Peter: Adam, you have been taught the Law of Sacrifice. Tell us your understanding of it. 
55 Adam: Through much suffering, Eve does bear the children. Through her suffering our children do replenish the earth. She sacrifices not for her own sake, but for the sake of all living. This is the sacrifice that the Son of God will make for all people. 
56 Peter: That is right. She by the gift of the Mother does magnify her calling, and she is greatly blessed with the gifts of the Spirit because of her sacrifice for the sake of all living. For this reason, you did call her the Mother of all Living. For, she is after the similitude of your Mother which is in Heaven. The Law of Sacrifice is designed to teach you that you must learn to sacrifice as she does in order to progress in light and truth as she does. 
57 Adam: It is hard for men to understand that they may sacrifice in the way of women, seeing that they may not bear children. 
58 Peter: It is true that you may not bear children. But you may sacrifice still. The oblation you give upon the altar is like unto the sacrifice that the Creator will make for all people. You may also give of yourself in this manner and, with much prayer and fasting, become like Him. This is the Law of Sacrifice. 
59 Adam: It is a good thing that we have been taught. Surely, we are blessed for having covenanted to obey this law. For, I cannot see any evil in becoming like the Creator. Neither can I see any evil in learning to give freely of myself, even as Eve does sacrifice her own body for the sake of all living. 
60 Peter: It is good. If you and your posterity will always look to God for guidance, He will send messengers that will teach every generation the manner in which they may make this sacrifice. And if you and your posterity wish to become like the Creator, He will give you power and authority to do all those things that He would do, were He here to do them. And by learning to live this law, you shall progress from point to point by the sacrifice that you make for your neighbor. Yes, Adam, order upon order, line upon line, precept on precept, you shall learn and grow. You and Eve have covenanted to keep this law, and you have proven faithful in that covenant. We will now confer upon you the Priesthood after the Order of the Son of God. This priesthood has to do with the work which the Lord will ask you to do for all those who have progressed to that point where they may be admitted upon the Way. With it, you shall work for the benefit of the living as well as the dead. Will you submit to this ordination? 
61 Adam: I will submit myself to it. 
62 Narrator: Please kneel. 
63 Peter: Adam, by the authority given to me by Jesus Christ, and by the commission I have received of Him, I confer upon you the Priesthood after the Order of the Son of God. By this priesthood you may say and do all those things which He would do were He here to do them. By this priesthood, He will make a marvelous work and a wonder through you and through your posterity. I do this in His name, for I am His servant. Amen. 
64 Peter: Adam, you have received the priesthood which will be called the Priesthood after the Order of the Son of God, or the “Melchizedek Priesthood.” This order gives you authority to serve and prepare all those men and women who have progressed to that point where they may enter upon the Way and receive instruction from angels and the spirits of just men and women made perfect by the atonement. You will be instructed in certain ordinances, which will change from time to time according to the needs of your posterity. Place a robe over your left shoulder whenever you are officiating in the ordinances of this priesthood . At a certain time that will be shown to you hereafter, when you have learned all that you must through officiating in the ordinances of the priesthood, you will be instructed to place the robe on both shoulders. 
65 Peter: Eve, you have already received the Priesthood in its wholeness and have no need of the conferring of the Orders of the Priesthood. Place the Robe of the Priesthood upon both shoulders whenever you officiate in the ordinances and oblations of this Order. Officiate in this priesthood with your husband and be a helpmeet for him. 
66 Peter: We give you both the first token of the higher priesthood. This token will serve to remind you of the great sacrifice that the Son of God will make for the good of all living. You shall keep this token sacred and only use it in a time and manner that will be shown you. 
67 Peter: We are also instructed to teach to you the Law of Chastity. Adam, for you and all the men of your posterity, this law means that you so dedicate yourselves to your wife that you covenant to have no sexual relations except with the woman whom God has given you to wed. Eve, for you and all the women of your posterity, this law means that you so dedicate yourselves to your husband that you covenant to have no sexual relations except with the husband whom God has given you. 
68 Adam: I do now covenant, before God, angels, and these witnesses, that I will obey the Law of Chastity and have no sexual relations with any woman except the wife whom God has given me to wed. 
69 Eve: I do now covenant, before God, angels, and these witnesses, that I will obey the Law of Chastity and have no sexual relations with any man except with the husband whom God has given me to wed. 
70 Peter: That will do well enough. 
71 Peter: All men present in this assembly should have received the High Priesthood by ordination. If there are any who have not had this priesthood conferred on them, you should adjourn now to another place and those who have the commission to do so will confer it upon you. Then you may continue. 
72 Peter: We will now demonstrate the First Token of the High Priesthood. This is the token. The right hand is offered with fingers together and thumb extended. The token is given by taking the extended hand with the thumb on the outside of the hand and the index finger on the inside of the hand in the center of the palm. This is the Sign of the Nail and is intended to cause the giver of the token, as also the receiver, to contemplate the sacrifice of the Son of God, Who was hung upon the tree. 
73 Peter: When Jesus was crucified, nails were driven through the center of the palm. This is the sign and the token. This token is to be kept sacred until a time and place specified hereafter, or in that instance in which the Holy Ghost prompts that it be utilized. 
74 Peter: We desire all to receive it, all arise. 
75 Peter: The ordinances of the High Priesthood include the administration of the Gift of the Holy Ghost, the ordinance of Marriage, and the ordinances of the High Place. 
76 Peter: We will now take time to consider the Law of Chastity. Each of you should meditate upon the things you have learned and to seek the confirmation of the Holy Ghost regarding the instruction. Break for Instruction 
Resume Session 
 ————


CHAPTER 5 
1 Peter: Each of you covenant to obey the Law of Chastity, whereby you understand that you shall have no sexual relations with anyone but the spouse whom the Lord has given you to wed. Each of you bow your head and say, Yes. 
2 Peter: That will do. We will now return and report. 
3 Peter: Jehovah, we have been down to the Man and the Woman in the world which we have created together. We have conferred upon the Man the Higher Priesthood and we have reminded the Woman of the priesthood she has already received of the Mother. We instructed the Man to place the robe on the left shoulder when administering the ordinances of the Higher Priesthood, and we have given the man and the Woman the token associated with it. We have taught them the Law of Chastity, which they have received by covenant. This is our report. 
4 Jehovah: It is well. Elohim Heavenly Father, Your messengers have been down to the Man and the Woman in the world we have created together, and have done all that You commanded. The Man has received the Higher Priesthood and the Woman has remembered it. They have received the Law of Chastity by covenant. They have been true and faithful in all that We command them to do. 
5 Elohim Heavenly Father: It is well. The woman is a right model for the man and they are ready to progress further. 
6 Elohim Heavenly Father: Jehovah, send My messengers, Peter, James and John, again down to the Man and the Woman in the world we have created together. Give them gifts of the Spirit, for they have remained faithful to the Laws and commandments We have given them. Teach them the Law of Consecration and have them receive it by covenant. Give them the second token of the Higher Priesthood. Introduce them into the Terrestrial World upon the Way. Then have them return and report. 
7 Jehovah: It shall be done. 
8 Jehovah: Peter, take James and John and go down to the Man and the Woman in the world which we have created together. Teach them the Law of Consecration and have them both receive it by covenant. Give them gifts of the Spirit and introduce them into the Terrestrial World upon the Way, where they may be instructed more fully and in safety. 
9 Peter: It shall be done, Jehovah. Come, James and John. 
10 James: We will go down. 
11 John: Yes, let us go down. 
12 Peter: Adam, what is the meaning of these war sounds? 
13 Adam: These things come of the teachings of Satan. We do not teach these things in the Thanksgiving Lodge, but the world bows at the feet of Satan. 
14 Narrator: Now, Satan was always very near whenever any visitors came to the Thanksgiving Lodge and this day was no exception. The three visitors had only to go back out the lodge flap to bump into him, the snooper. 
15 Peter: What have you been teaching this people? 
16 Satan: I have been teaching them the World Way. 
17 Peter: And how do they like what you have taught them? 
18 Satan: Many like it very much. Only the strongest rule and the weak serve them. It is just as it is with the Buffalo herd. The strong bulls dominate and the young wait their turn. 
19 Peter: Not so, evil one. In the great herds the strong protect the young and the weak. You have perverted the ways of the beasts and made men beastly. 
20 Peter: Do you believe what Lucifer teaches? 
21 Adam: I know that there are strong and there are weak, but I believe that we should bear each other’s burdens. The teachings of Satan turn in the hand. They sometimes seem right at first, but then they cause misery. 
22 Satan: I teach the lessons of nature! 
23 Adam: This is true. In nature, the strong survive and the weak perish. One need only observe the animals and plants to know that he speaks some truth. Even the perverse solutions he provides are seen in nature. 
24 Satan: That is right. My wisdom is proven by the test of time. What has always been, shall always be. 
25 Peter: Your words seem confused, Adam. How do you know which path to follow? 
26 Adam: The Creator taught me the Thanksgiving Way. He promised to teach me more if I stay in His Path. 
27 Peter: That is right, Adam, if you continue in this Path, you will learn to overcome even the natural man and become like Father. 
28 Adam: Satan, I will teach the people to avoid you and your counsel. 
29 Satan: See how powerful I am? I am the Chief of the Snake Lodge. My people will come and kill you and your weak ones. There is no one who can threaten us. My young men are strong and well trained and I am their teacher, not you, Adam. 
30 Satan: Now, Peter, James and John, what do you think you can do? 
31 Peter: I am Buffalo Spirit and these, my companions, are the Thunder Twins. These stones that I wear are the Earth Medicine. The lightning pattern on their cloaks is the Sky and the Wind Medicine. I will cause the earth to burn you when you expose yourself to the Sky. Hide yourself, you old serpent, or by the strength of the elements will your weakness be made known to man. 
32 Satan: How dare you threaten me? You may have power in the Thanksgiving Lodge, but my words are my medicine, and my medicine is great in the Council! You banish me to the shadowy places, yet my words shall break the back of the earth! Yes, my young men will harness and control the power of the wind and the sky, and the more powerful they become, the greater will be my influence over them. You cannot imprison me, Peter, for I will cause man to cover the world in a mist of darkness. Then your strong medicine will have no power over me. Man’s nature will never change in this world and as long as that is so, I will be Chief over men! 
33 Peter: As we have cast you out from the midst of the Thanksgiving Lodge and from the door of the High Place, now we do cast you out from open communion with the children of men. Depart, Satan! From this day forever you shall have no more voice in the Council. Be gone! 
34 Satan: It is man who takes counsel. You cannot remove me or my voice! Nature governs men and nature will always speak! 
35 Peter: We are servants of the Creator! 
36 Narrator: Then Lucifer knew he was beaten, for all Nature obeys the voice of Him that created it. Slowly, he retreated into the rocks, but his words have echoed in every generation of time. Beware always that you do not take them up in your hearts. 
37 Adam: The words that Satan has spoken are true. Man will always have his nature and, even without the counsel of Satan himself, man will always be drawn to dominate and to enslave. How shall we overcome it? 
38 Peter: Eve has not the nature of Man. The Creator will provide guidance and a Way for man to learn to overcome his nature. You have both covenanted to obey the Law of Chastity and you have been faithful to that covenant. By the Holy Spirit of Promise, which is the Holy Ghost, your covenant one with another is sealed up unto Christ. It is made eternal. 
39 Peter: Adam, through the ways of your wife, you shall learn to nurture the weak and comfort the sick and the feeble. The Mother works for the benefit of the whole family. Her gift is an example of the sacrifice of the Son. This is the Plan of the Creator – that one shall take upon himself all things according to the consecration of all living. So that they may understand the consecration and atonement of the New and Everlasting Covenant, we have taught you and you must teach your children to consecrate their substance one to another. This ought to be an example to you in all areas of life. If you will consecrate all with which the Lord has blessed you, all with which He does now bless you, and all with which He will yet see fit to bless you, to the good of all His children, then the Creator will be your Teacher and He will provide you with counsel from your Grandfathers. By these things shall man learn to protect the weak rather than to enslave them. Be faithful in this teaching and you will receive all things. 
40 Adam: I now covenant before God, angels, and these witnesses, that I do consecrate all with which the Lord has blessed me, all with which He does now bless me, and all with which He will yet bless me, to the good of all His children. I covenant that I will consider prayerfully that stewardship which the Lord has given me to determine the surplus of it by the promptings of the Holy Ghost, and that I will give freely of that surplus to the needy, to the unfortunate, and to the building up of the Lord’s Kingdom here on earth. 
41 Eve: I now covenant before God, angels, and these witnesses, that I do support and sustain my husband, and I do join with him in consecrating all with which the Lord has blessed me, all with which He does now bless me, and all with which He will yet bless me, to the good of all His children. I covenant that I will consider prayerfully that stewardship which the Lord has given me to determine the surplus of it by the promptings of the Holy Ghost, and that I will give freely of that surplus to the needy, to the unfortunate, and to the building up of the Lord’s Kingdom here on earth. 
42 Peter: That is enough. Yes, that will do. 
43 Peter: Adam, we are instructed to give unto you the gifts of the Spirit. Will you submit to this ordinance? 
44 Adam: I will submit to it. 
45 Peter: Adam, by the authority given us of Jesus Christ, and by the commission which we have received of Him, we set you apart from among all men, and we bestow upon you an endowment of power. By this endowment, you shall walk upon the Way and converse in the tongues of angels, for you shall be instructed by them. We give you the keys of the Priesthood and of the gifts of the Spirit. Seek now the face of your God! Amen. 
46 Peter: Eve, will you submit to this ordinance? 
47 Eve: I will submit to it. 
48 Peter: Eve, by the authority given us of Jesus Christ, and by the commission which we have received of Him, we set you apart from among all men, and we bestow upon you an endowment of power. By this endowment, you shall walk upon the Way and converse in the tongues of angels, for you shall be instructed by them. We give you the keys of the Priesthood and of the gifts of the Spirit. Seek now the face of your God! Amen. 
49 Peter: It is well. Although we have set you apart and given you the gifts of the Spirit by the laying on of hands, this is only the promise or the opportunity to receive them. The realization of this endowment depends entirely upon your faithfulness in seeking the face of God. Principal among these gifts is the gift of healing. The power of the Healer is in the hands. Its tokens are the many things on this earth that Elohim Heavenly Mother has provided for the healing of the body and the spirit. The sign of this gift is given by the Father so that you will always remember that the gifts of God work best when they are linked together, just as the health of the body is determined by the proper functioning of all the organs, and disease is defined by the dysfunction of the organs, one or all. To remind you of this token, you shall always wear a continuous green thread around your waist, either in the form of an apron or sewn directly into your garments. 
50 Peter: We are instructed to give unto you the second token of the higher priesthood. It is the Sign of the Healer, the Patriarchal Grip or Sure Sign of the Nail. It has a name, but it will not be given to you until a time and place which shall be given to you hereafter. 
Break for Instruction 
————


CHAPTER 6 
Resume Session 
1 Peter: All of you covenant to obey the Law of Consecration, whereby, you consecrate all that you have received from the Lord, all that you do now receive from the Lord, and all that you will yet receive, unto the Lord for His purposes. You will utilize the gifts of God for your own maintenance and with the surplus you covenant to feed the hungry, clothe the naked, lift up the hands that hang down, and to shoulder each other’s burdens. All of you, bow your heads and say, Yes. 
2 Peter: That will do. We will now demonstrate the token of the Higher Priesthood. This is the token of the Higher Priesthood: The giver and the receiver of the token grasp each other by the right hands, interlocking the little finger and the index finger pressing against the inside of the wrist. This is the Sure Sign of the Nail, or, the Nail in the Sure Place, and is intended to cause the giver of the token, as also the receiver, to contemplate the surety of the sacrifice of the Son of God, who was hung upon the tree and that all things created are linked together by the atonement of the Son. When Jesus was crucified, nails were driven through the center of the palm, and, to prevent the nail from pulling through the flesh of the hand, other nails were driven through the wrist. This is the sign and the token. This token is to be kept sacred until a time and place specified hereafter, or until that instance in which the Holy Ghost prompts that it be utilized. 
3 Peter: We desire all to receive it. All arise. 
4 Peter: That will do. 
5 Peter: Adam and Eve, we have been instructed to introduce you into the Terrestrial World upon the Way which the Creator has made for this purpose. You will recall that before you were driven into the lonely world, you lived in constant contact with the Creator. He desires that you come once again into His presence. He has created a place which He calls the Way, upon which you may walk. In this place you will come into contact with angels, the spirits of just men and women made perfect, and even with Jesus Himself, to be instructed in all that you need to do to come once again into the presence of the Father and the Mother. 
6 Adam: How can this be? Can a mortal man stand in the presence of Heavenly Beings? 
7 Peter: You may not stand in the presence of Heavenly Beings and live in the mortal flesh. But in your spirit you may walk the Way and be instructed by Heavenly Beings while your flesh is preserved and safeguarded. For, you have been true and faithful in all that the Lord has seen fit to command you. Because of this, He will make a change in your spiritual substance, such that, should you come into contact with exalted men and women, your flesh shall be preserved. The Holy Ghost shall make this change upon you, and you shall be sealed up unto Christ, being His. Will you come with us upon this Way? 
8 Adam: I will come upon this Way with you. Yes, I would truly seek the face of my God! 
9 Eve: I, too, would seek my Savior’s face. I will come with you upon this Way. 
10 Peter: Come, James and John. Let us introduce Adam and Eve into the Terrestrial World so that they may walk upon the Way with their ancestors. 
11 Peter: We will now return and report. 
12 Peter: Jehovah, we have been down to the man Adam and the woman Eve. We have done all that You commanded us. They have received all that You would have them receive, and they do walk upon the Way. This is our report. 
13 Jehovah: It is well, Peter, James and John. 
14 Jehovah: Elohim Heavenly Father. Peter, James and John have been down to the world which we have created together, as You commanded. They have done all that we have commanded them to do. The Man and the Woman have received all that You would give them and have taken upon themselves the Law of Consecration by covenant. They have been introduced into the Terrestrial World upon the Way. This is their report. 
15 Elohim Heavenly Father: It is well, Jehovah. Go now with Peter, James and John, and visit Adam and Eve upon the Way We have provided for them. Have Peter instruct them in the Right Order of Prayer. Then instruct them as to the Veil and its symbols. When they have been prepared in all things, by receiving instruction upon the Way, even from those messengers and guides whom I will send to them, and even by Your own mouth, introduce them at the Veil and I will converse with them there. 
16 Jehovah: It shall be done, Elohim Heavenly Father. Come, Peter, James and John, let us go to Adam and Eve upon the Way. 
17 Jehovah: Adam and Eve, I am Jesus Christ who will come, the Son of the Living God. You have received My word by the mouths of these messengers whom the Father has sent you, and who have brought you here upon the Way. If you are true and faithful, you shall also be brought to the Veil of Heaven to converse with the Father, here upon the Way. 
18 Jehovah: Peter, instruct Adam and Eve concerning the Right Order of Prayer upon the Way. 
19 Peter: It shall be done, Jehovah. 
20 Peter: Adam, the Way is provided to all those whose intentions have proved good and faithful. Because of this, you may come to this sacred and safe place to receive more instruction, to pray, to meditate and to seek the face of the Lord. When you come upon the Way, you will often be invited to pray in counsel with others who have also come here. This is the order of prayer when you offer this oblation in counsel. You shall stand together in a circle, for all truth may be circumscribed into one eternal round, or great hoop, and what you send out into the Universe shall surely come back to you. You shall recite all the tokens and signs that you have been given, for this denotes attention and exactness in following the counsels of God. You shall also make the signs of the gifts of the Spirit you have received, especially the sign of the Gift of Healing, for it represents the power given you of the Father and the Mother whereby you are given health in the navel, marrow in the bones, strength in the loins and in the sinews. Verily, the gifts of the Spirit bestow the power of the Lord’s priesthood upon you and all your posterity, through all generations of time, and throughout all eternity. When you have done these things, you shall call upon the Lord three times, as you have been taught to do, and you shall offer prayer unto the Lord, not forgetting the sick and the needy. If you do this with faith and pure intent, the Lord will answer your prayer. 
21 Peter: Let us now gather in the Right Order of Prayer. 
22 Peter: Each of you make the signs of the High Place as you have been instructed to do. 
23 Peter: That will do. Now, let each man take the woman or man at his left by the right hand with the Sure Sign of the Nail and raise his left arm up to heaven. Let the elbow of his left arm rest upon the right shoulder of the person to his left. In this way the circle is completed and the prayer is carried up into heaven with the combined energy of all the participants. We are one heart and one mind, and we have all prayer and supplication in common. 
24 Peter: That will do. 
25 Jehovah: It is well, Peter. I will now explain the Veil of Heaven. There is a Veil of Forgetfulness that separates you from Father. This Veil is within you. As you walk upon the Way and receive instruction from angels, the spirits of just men and women made perfect, and from Myself, this Veil of Forgetfulness will become thin. However, you cannot come into the presence of the Father and the Mother, except through intervention, either by Me or by the Holy Ghost. When you come upon the Way, you do receive that intervention, and I may introduce you at the very Veil of Heaven to converse with the Father. When you have received this endowment of power, you shall make symbols to wear that will remind you to come upon the Way often to converse with Heavenly Beings. These symbols should include a triangle pointing heavenward, representing your own attempt to communicate with God. You should also include a triangle pointing earthward, representing God’s attempt to communicate with you. When these symbols are combined, they shall remind you of the Way, for the combination of your attempt to communicate with God and God’s attempt to communicate with you, is a right understanding of the very real need for personal and continuous revelation. Wear this symbol whenever you engage in the ordinances of the High Place, to remind you of your responsibility upon the Way. When you have overcome the Natural Man, you shall have become Mine indeed. In that moment, the Veil will be taken away and shall no longer exist in you. 
26 Jehovah: It is well, Peter, James and John. Adam and Eve have been true and faithful in all that we have taught them. Let us now return and report our labors. 
27 Jehovah: Elohim Heavenly Father, we have been to the Way and visited with Adam and Eve. We have instructed them as You did command and they have remained true and faithful to all that You have given them. 
28 Elohim Heavenly Father: It is well, Jehovah. Go again to Adam and Eve and teach them the second anointing. Stand with them and make their calling and election sure, preparatory to introducing them at the Veil of Heaven to converse with Me. 
29 Jehovah: It shall be done, Elohim Heavenly Father. 
30 Jehovah: Adam and Eve. I will now instruct you as to the ordinance of the second anointing, preparatory to introducing you at the Veil of Heaven to converse with Father. This is an ordinance which cannot be performed except by a husband and wife, and myself. Therefore, when you return again into the Telestial World wherein your bodies continue to reside, take each other aside into a sacred place, and this may be in your own home or you may go up to the High Place to do it, and each of you wash and anoint the other’s feet, palms and crown of the head. Use clean water of the font and pure oil of the vine. Eve, take the Robe of the Priesthood off the left shoulder of your husband and place it upon both of his shoulders, just as you wear the robe on both shoulders. Each of you place your hands upon the shoulders of the other and bow your heads. In this posture shall you wait upon Me. I will come unto you and place My hands upon your heads, and with this laying on of hands, I shall make your calling and election sure and administer unto you the second anointing. Upon receiving this More Sure Word of Prophecy, you shall have the administration of the Holy Ghost at all times and you shall have access to the gifts of the Spirit at all times, and you shall also have the administration of the surety of My love and My presence at all times. Now, return again from off of the Way, into the Telestial World and do all that you have been commanded. I shall return unto the Father and report. 
31 Adam: We will do all that You say, Jehovah. 
32 Eve: We will return and fulfill all Your words, Jehovah. 
33 Jehovah: Elohim Heavenly Father, I have been to visit with Adam and Eve upon the Way. I have instructed them in all that You commanded Me and they are true and faithful to Your commands. 
34 Elohim Heavenly Father: It is well, Jehovah. When Adam and Eve perform the ordinance of the Second Endowment, go to them in the Telestial World and make their calling and election sure. Then bring them again upon the Way and introduce them at the Veil. I will converse with them there. 
35 Jehovah: It shall be done, Elohim Heavenly Father. 
Break for Instruction 
————


CHAPTER 7 
Resume Session 
1 Jehovah: It is well. Now, Adam and Eve, here upon the Way, you may build and create the image of things so that your mind can conceive of eternal things. Conceive now of a Veil that separates you from the Father. 
(The man representing Jehovah guides the participant to a representation of the Veil of Heaven. Jehovah claps His hands three times.) 
2 Elohim Heavenly Father: What is wanted? 
3 Jehovah: Adam (Eve), having been true and faithful in all that You have given them, wishes now to converse with the Father through the Veil . 
4 Elohim Heavenly Father: Present him (her) at the Veil and his (her) request will be granted. 
5 Elohim Heavenly Father: What is that? 
6 Adam (Eve): It is the first token of the Higher Priesthood. 
7 Elohim Heavenly Father: What does it signify? 
8 Adam (Eve): It represents the sacrifice of the Son. 
9 Elohim Heavenly Father: That will do. 
10 Elohim Heavenly Father: What is that? 
11 Adam (Eve): The second token of the Higher Priesthood, or Sure Sign of the Nail. 
12 Elohim Heavenly Father: What does it signify? 
13 Adam (Eve): It represents the surety of the atonement that the Son makes for all living. 
14 Elohim Heavenly Father: That will do. 
15 Elohim Heavenly Father: What is wanted? 
16 Jehovah: Adam (Eve), having been true and faithful in all the commands of the Father, wishes to come into His presence. 
17 Elohim Heavenly Father: The Veil is undone in him (her). Nothing can prevent such a one. Let him (her) enter. 
________________


The Law of Chastity
A Revelation from the Servant of the Lord


1 Adultery is an act most abominable unto me, Jesus Christ. When a man and a woman are married in my holy way, they pledge themselves to each other. They are sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise when they do this in the sacred manner, and become, as it were, one flesh. They become one, in the similitude of My Father and Mother in Heaven. 
2 When, having thus covenanted together, one or the other abandons the covenant and take up with another to satisfy their lust, the Holy Ghost breaks the sealing and the promises are taken away. This grieves the Spirit, as also our Heavenly Parents. 
3 Man must learn that without his wife he may not dwell in the same spheres My Father which is in Heaven. Indeed, without his wife he could not overcome the promptings of the adversary, nor even his own flesh. Only by and through the gift given to all women by My Mother which is in Heaven, is man able to discern between the promptings of the Holy Ghost and the enticing of the adversary and his angels. Therefore, let the man labor diligently all the days of his life to become like unto his wife. 
4 But if a man commit adultery, wherein he gain intimacy with any woman other than his own wife, and if a woman do the same with any man who doth not belong to her through the covenant of marriage, they do that thing which makes the New and Everlasting Covenant into a thing of naught. Then are they left unto their own again and must endure the continuation of the deaths. Wherefore, they must live and die eternally, and there is no measuring their torment. 
5 Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother and cleave unto his wife, and they twain shall be one flesh. And they shall enjoy the continuation of the lives and, after the resurrection, they shall die not, but shall be even as My Father and Mother which are in Heaven. 
6 Now, this law strikes at the very heart of creation, wherefore, unto all those who would come unto Me be this warning and a forewarning: I, the Lord, shall not be mocked. If there be any who do anything like unto the committing of adultery, they shall not be admitted into any communion with Me or My Father which is in Heaven. Yea, they shall grieve the Spirit and shall only have the companionship of the Holy Ghost insofar as they repent. Unless they repent, they cannot seek My face nor come into the presence of the Father. 
7 Wherefore, any man or woman who cleave unto any who is not their own by covenant, do commit adultery. And the man or woman, being unmarried, who dally with men and women who are not their own by covenant, do commit adultery. And the man, being joined by the covenant, who looks upon a woman not his own to lust after her and, thinking in his mind to satisfy his lust upon her, does commit adultery in his mind. Even so the woman, who, seeing a man who is not her own, and lusts after him, does commit adultery in her heart. Behold, this is transgression not as grave as the act of adultery, but it is grave enough to grieve the Holy Ghost. Wherefore, they must repent. 
8 And the sin of fornication is like unto adultery, wherefore, teach your children to so honor themselves and their brothers and sisters as to never fall into this terrible transgression. For, the same principles apply to fornication as do the greater sin of adultery. 
9 To avoid such sins, therefore, you must teach young people modesty in dress, in speech and in manners. For, the first step to these errors is the corruption of language and conduct. That which becomes acceptable in speech dictates that which becomes acceptable in action, and the corruption of the language and manners of a generation causes the corruption of conduct and the casting away of wisdom. 
10 Verily, men and women have been given the right and power of procreation and every person knows well enough those sensations in their own frames which lead to the operation of that power in them. Therefore, let none say they are not informed and that the Lord has not made His will known concerning these things. It is true, I gave these things unto man in the creation, but I also gave unto man the power to discern and to govern these things; and I expect My children to operate in those powers as well as in any other gift. The misuse of this gift is fornication. 
11 Wherefore, teach the little children to understand and respect this power within them and to honor it. Teach them chastity, modesty, prudence and wisdom in the use of all gifts that I give unto the children of men. They will profit greatly by it, for if they learn these things while in their youth, the great decisions will be the easier for them throughout their lives. This is My word and My will concerning the Law of Chastity.
________________




________________


The Law of Consecration
A Revelation from the Servant of the Lord


1 Behold, when you covenant to keep the Law of Consecration, you covenant to trust in the Lord in all things, and to lean not upon your own understanding. For, the laws and dictates of men center on property. But I say unto you, man has no property, for the world is My footstool. Wherefore, how may anyone claim it unless they claim Me? And if I know not the claimant, how then may he lay claim to that which does not belong to him? Verily, he bears false witness and I will spew him out. 
2 Wherefore, think not of your possessions as your own property. I give My substance unto you to prove you, whether you will be a good steward of My property. The good steward shall gain more than this world can produce in the kingdom of My Father. Wherefore, if you desire riches, remember that they are Mine and I give them to that steward who will do My bidding continually. Accordingly, if you are the good steward and desire riches, you will desire them only because they allow you to perform those things whichI will command of you. Yea, you will seek riches for My purposes and not your own. 
3 Verily I say unto you, the Law of Consecration is simply that you will accept from Me the call to be My steward and you will use the blessings I give you willingly and prudently for your own maintenance. And that which you do not require for your maintenance, you will freely give to those of My children who have need. Yea, you shall give of your excess to the poor, to the halt, to the sick, to the needy. You shall visit the widow in her loneliness and you shall expeditiously judge the needs of the fatherless and be as a father or mother unto them. 
4 And this you shall do freely, with joy in your heart, not being commanded to it and not grudgingly. For he who does begrudge the needy, robs Me. Yea, he who retains his increase and gives it not to he who has not enough, steals the fruit of My vineyard and shall be judged. I will not approve of his works and, in the great and dreadful day, all those who needed My substance of him, and he would not, shall stand up against him with hard things and I will not justify him. 
5 Then must that one stand alone in the pride of his heart before My Father. Let him then rely upon his property. Verily, he shall stand naked before the judgment seat and there will be none to call him friend. And he shall be incomplete conscience of his guilt and his unworthiness. Yea, in his nakedness before the Father, all will be known and there shall be none to say: Yes, Father, he has sinned and is unworthy. But he is my friend and I have paid the price for him because he believed. Wherefore, let him enter for my sake. 
6 Let him cry his case alone. Let him make his claim against the poor and the needy. Yea, let him contrive to convince the Father, as he convinced himself in his pride, that the poor and the needy are beggars and have brought upon themselves their condition by their own folly. Let him suggest that the widow had no right upon his property. Let him profess that the fatherless had no claim upon him. Woe unto such a one. 
7 I say unto you, he shall make no such profanation before the great God of Heaven, but will shut his mouth. And there shall be weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth. For this one covenanted to keep the Law of Consecration and then desecrated the footstool of the Creator and ground the face of the poor. Wherefore, be a good steward all you who would take upon you this covenant. If not, it were better that you never knew of Me. 
8 Let man labor with the sweat of his brow to earn his keep. For, the laborer is worthy of his hire and I begrudge no one My substance. For, are you not all needy before Me? Then how shall I not provide for you fromMy substance?But let him labor honestly before My face and I will prosper him. And if hebeneedy indeed, then let My saints not begrudge him My substance in My name. 
9 Let all who have surplus give it to those who have not enough for their maintenance first. Then, when all the needy are cared for out of the purity and singleness of the hearts of their neighbors, let the surplus be used to create opportunity for the needy to overcome their difficulties. This is usury of which I am well pleased. And every person who would use My substance to make property, let it be done with this singleness in mind. 
10 Behold, this is not the Law of the Tithe. For it is still mete in My sight that My church should have sufficient for its needs also. Wherefore, let part of the surplus go toward building up My church. But, the greater part ought to be in the hands of My stewards to distribute according as the Spirit will dictate. Let all who would be My servants take up this stewardship.
11 Therefore shall My church grow and the needy shall not want. Behold, my saints shall have all things in common and there shall be no poor among them. Yea, no child shall ever know want, or hunger, or thirst, or cold, and there shall never be heard in heaven the cry of the widow. 
12 For, it is a great shame unto me that so many in this day do take upon them the Law of Consecration by covenant, and yet the cry of the needy doth rise up continually from My saints. How can this be? How can so many claim themselves worthy to enter into My Holy House when so much is amiss in their own? And how can so many think themselves justified in heaping unto themselves riches, in the face of such need? 
13 Yea, the children cry unto Me and their bellies are empty. And the lame cry unto Me, and the sick. And there is no end of distinction between they who have and they who have not. Wherefore, can you show unto Me any of My Wards and Stakes wherein there are none who stand up before the body of my saints and extol their own virtues because their Lord has so blessed them, but who refuse to provide their surplus to the poor and who withhold to themselves and for the sake of their own future the bounty that I give unto them? I say there are none to be found in all My church. Verily, all tables are filled with vomit. 
14 How has My word been altered? How has the pulpit of My church become a Rameumptum? It is because My shepherds have not taught the Law of Consecration. My little ones have been raised up with a love of money and a worship of property. My saints sit and listen to My shepherds and follow their teachings. Why should they not? Yet, man’s law of property has taken root in the hearts of men and it overshadows their souls. 
15 Else find Me the man who takes no thought in the morrow, even as I taught My servants. Is there such a one in Zion who does not bring down upon him the hailstorm of railing from his neighbors? And what man among you who has labored all his life to provide for his family, but provided not against his old age, does not reap a whirlwind of scorn from all around him? What young man in My church does not labor to gain the world? And who among you does not wish for more, though he has sufficient for his needs?
16 Behold, let him whose eyes are opened see and understand. My whole church stands upon the brink of a precipice because of the teachings of My shepherds. Verily, the times come that will test the strength of My people. In that day, if they have set their hearts upon their property, they shall be bitterly disappointed. And let all they who have laid up store of money and not of righteousness, take of that money and buy pottage with it. Behold, I say unto you, all their money will buy but one measure of meal and a little oil, and they shall make up one last cake to eat before they perish. And if they have not laid up stores of righteousness, who shall be their prophet to extend the meal and the oil until the famine end? 
17 But they who keep the Law of Consecration shall have sufficient for their needs and a surplus still, even in the day of wrath. Then shall the pure in heart prosper, though property they have none. (The assembly is assigned to take time to ponder and pray about the Law of Consecration and the Covenant and Token associated with it.
________________




The Law of Sacrifice
A Revelation from the Servant of the Lord


1 In the ancient days, when the first man and woman walked the lone world, even your first parents, the man built an altar and offered sacrifice. When an angel came near unto him and asked him why he did this, his reply demonstrated unto Me, Jesus Christ, his faith and steadfastness in keepingMy commandments. He said: I know not, save I have been commanded to do it. The angel replied that this thing was in the similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten Son of the Father. 
2 Man possesses very little that he may give unto Me as token of his esteem. Does man own the world? It is My footstool, wherefore, how may he betoken confidence in Me by giving Me what is My own? Verily, man has been given the stuff of his own body and over it he has agency. He may only sacrifice that which is his. Adam obeyed My will and offered himself a sacrifice, even the words of his own mouth, and the sacrifice was acceptable to Me. 
3 Later, when men began to tend the earth, they gained fromMe stewardship over the things of their making. When Abel and his brother Cain offered the fruits of their labors, neither of the material sacrifices was acceptable toMe. Surely, the Lord needs no victuals. But the intent of their hearts and the understanding of their minds did I judge, and I found Abel’s sacrifice worthy. 
4 For Abel was like unto his father and offered all that he had unto Me, even his whole heart and soul. The firstlings of his flock were only tokens of his sacrifice. Nevertheless, his sacrifice was complete only because his offering was everything that he was. 
5 Cain was not like unto his father. His offering of the fruit of his field was the only offering he made. He equated the fruit with all of his efforts and valued the fruit above all the work of My hands. His offering was a token of what he expected to receive of Me in reward for his obedience. Verily, he wished to purchase My approval and My love with the work of his own hands. 
6 The Law of Sacrifice requires that every man and every woman offer the very life within them unto Me. Verily, this is the offering I made for them. My offering was not merely the honor that is due Me in Heaven, no, nor was it the fruit of My labors. I offered Myself as a sacrifice and by it I gained the Atonement of all living. When those who believe in Me take upon themselves the Law of Sacrifice, they offer a broken heart and a contrite spirit. Yea, even as Abel, they offer all that they are. 
7 Women, by the gift of My Mother which is in Heaven, sacrifice in a manner like unto My own offering, and they do it not for themselves, but for the sake of all living. To honor that gift, I chose the offering of women, even the shedding of blood and of water, as the token of the sacrifice of My body. Women, by the nature of their creation, give this sacrifice freely and at the risk of their own lives. Surely, they give their lives for people everywhere. To honor that creation, I gave all that I had made in the sacrifice. 
8 This is the sacrifice that is acceptable unto Me. The broken heart signifies the arm of the flesh. Let men learn to esteem not their strength and even honor the weak by giving up that very strength in sacrifice. The contrite spirit signifies the intent and motive in the sacrifice. Let men learn to sacrifice with an eye not single to the anticipated reward, but rather, let them sacrifice all that they are with a thankful voice and an upraised spirit. Let them acknowledge the reward already given and the blessing already received, asAbel did. 
9 If this is the sacrifice offered by men, then I shall accept it, for it is given in faith. But very few are there that understand these principles. I do not accept the offering of money unless it is only the token of everything else, for what need have I of lucre? I ask for the hearts of men. But let them offer Me their hearts in the spirit of the women’s offering. Let them sacrifice, not thinking of themselves and their own gain. Let them covenant to sacrifice for the sake of all people and all living. 
10 This is the guiding principle of the Itsi which are My Chosen People and, when performed with purity of heart and contriteness of spirit, I do accept this token. For, in the Itsi, men sit under the canopy of heaven with nothing to offer but themselves. They give up the very life-giving fluid essence of the body, after the similitude of My sacrifice and of women’s, and they do it with joy in their hearts and great rejoicing. 
11 This is a sacrifice made in thanksgiving and it is more pleasing unto Me than any money. It honors the honorable and guides men to seek the better gift and the greater light. Such sacrifice will do much to teach men about the creation and to honor the woman in a manner befitting the sons of God.
12 And if men sacrifice to Me out of the fruit of their labors, and they do it as Abel did, behold, this is acceptable to Me also. For it is not the token that I esteem but the sacrifice itself. 
13 Behold and observe the work that I did while laboring upon the cross. I declare unto you that the Atonement had already been accomplished through the power of the Holy Ghost. All that was left to Me was to freely give up the ghost. But unto My beloved did I give the charge to take in My mother and care for her. And I did ask the Father to forgive the multitude because they knew not what they did. Verily, they did not take My life fromMe, for I gave of Myself. 
14 Consider the acts of the Son of God in His sacrifice, you who call yourselves the sons of God, and see that your sacrifice is worthy.
________________






________________


THE FIRST BOOK 
OF SAMUEL THE LAMANITE 
THE SON OF CUMENCA, WHO WAS 
THE DAUGHTER OF SHI-TUGO
 
CHAPTER 1 
1 I am Samuel, and behold, I am but a youth. Nevertheless, the Spirit of God has come upon me and I must write the things that the Lord doth reveal to me. I am the son of Corienta, who married Cumenca, the daughter of Shi-Tugo and Hementim, who came into the Land Northward with Hagoth in the days of Shiblon, the prophet of God. And behold, I am Nem and a servant of God. Yea, my mother did dedicate me to the service of God and the same has been my occupation all the days of my life. 
2 Behold, I begin my record while I am in my youth, for I know not into what land the Lord may drive me, only that it has been revealed unto me that He will send me into lands and people unknown to me. But behold, He has also revealed to me that He will send me unto my brethren in the Land of Zarahemla. Wherefore, I take this opportunity to write somewhat the things the Spirit does direct while I am yet safe and sound in my own country. 
3 Now, it seems me fitting that I should write somewhat concerning my grandfather Shi-Tugo and also my grandmother Hementim. For they were great in wisdom and in favor with the Lord, and not much is recorded concerning them. Wherefore, I will write a song unto them, that all of my people may remember them, and so that their story may come unto their descendents in latter times. 
4 The daughter of Hemen was a righteous and bold woman, and it is meet that her story be included among the writings of the Nem. Now, Hemen was one of the Lamanite healers who traveled with our father Hagoth from the Land Southward. He first fought against Moroni, that great captain, and his brother Cumenihah also, but when the armies of the Lamanites were defeated, and when Moroni took the covenant of those Lamanites who would swear never to take the sword again against the Nephites, these two were among the covenanters. 
5 These two brothers were Healers and very accomplished were they in their art. Wherefore, when Moroni offered to covenant with the armies of the Lamanites, these and many others did gladly enter into the covenant with him. Now, among all those who did covenant with Moroni were the Healers of the Lamanites who, as a whole body, were opposed to the shedding of blood. These did lay down their weapons of war and took their families and were joined with the people who were formerly known as the Anti-Nephi-Lehies, but who are now known as the Ammonites. Wherefore, these two brothers and their families were become not Lamanites but Ammonites. Nevertheless, all people of dark skin were called Lamanites in those days. 
6 Hemen and Cumenihah, who was also called Cumeni, took their families and departed into the Land Northward with Hagoth and it was they who took of the entrails of the great fish and made food and medicine, and the people were saved. Howbeit, it was also they who discovered the plants in the land that were at once good for food and for medicine alike. They also kept not this knowledge to themselves, though it might have brought them much gain, but taught their science to all people liberally. Wherefore, our whole people are Healers to this day because of the Twins. Wherefore they are listed among the heroes of the people and are much revered. 
7 Now, Cumeni had many sons and daughters and they took their journey with him when he followed Hagoth into the North Country. But Hemen had but one child, a daughter, whom he called Hementim. 
8 Hementim was a woman tall and most fair, above all the women of the Ammonites. Yea, many of the men of the Ammonites desired her to wife, but she chose none of them, desiring to serve her father only. Hemen was dedicated to the craft and profession of her father, inasmuch as she had sworn herself to the healing of the sick and to the comforting of the afflicted. 
9 And there were many indeed, among the Ammonites who were in need of such assistance. For the wars had been severe and many of the Lamanites who covenanted with Moroni that they would never again take up the sword against the Nephites, and who had joined themselves with the Ammonites, had received many wounds and had suffered much privation. Wherefore, the Healers were employed every day in their care and comfort. 
10 Now, Hementim was the only issue (child) of Hemen, who was noted with renown as one of the greatest of the Healers. For he was both Teacher and Healer at once. She sat at her father's feet and listened as he taught the Healers. She did also stand at his side when he attended to the sick. Wherefore, she did learn all the art of her father and was exceedingly accomplished even at a young age. 
11 But this was not all. Hementim did also dedicate herself to the diligent study of the scriptures, insomuch that she was esteemed more learned than the learned and more wise than the wise. Wherefore, Hementim was a great help unto her father and, indeed, unto all of the Ammonites. Of all the people of the Ammonites, Hementim became the most sought after for her knowledge and her wisdom. Yea, she was evenly pursued by all, insomuch that even the prophet Shiblon did often consult with her, and he did teach her. 
12 Now when Hemen decided to take his journey with Hagoth, a great stir rose up among the Ammonites. For Hementim was determined to follow him. And some there were who believed that Hemen had constrained her, for she was a great help and a comfort to him. But she was so esteemed by the people that many thought to restrain her against her will, because that she was so great a help and a comfort to her people also. 
13 Wherefore, some of the people went unto Hemen and Cried: 
14 Let not Hementim abandon her people! For there are many needy and sick among us. Nay! Let not the Mother of the People leave her children and go into a strange land! 
15 But Hemen knew the heart of his daughter and strove with them: 
16 Are there not many Healers among the Ammonites? Howbeit shall my daughter be esteemed above all the Healers of this people? And is she not free to decide for herself whether to journey or to tarry? 
17 But behold, they continued to contend with him, saying: 
18 Nay, she is become too precious to us! Therefore, Hemen, command her to remain here in safety. For who would condone a mother who leaves her suckling babes? Nay, this must not be done. She must stay and comfort her people! 
19 Now, Hemen loved his daughter, and desired that she should remain with him. But he also knew that she was a woman of strong will and character, and that no one could constrain her by word and will, but only by bonds could she be held against her will. Wherefore, he replied unto them: 
20 I will speak to Hementim to see where her will lies. 
21 But they were close to wrath with him: 
22 Nay! We know her will. She will go off with you to journey into unknown parts, perhaps to suffer death at the hands of some unknown enemy, or to be devoured by wild beasts in a wild land. Command her, therefore. For we know that she is a strong willed and an adamant woman, but she is also well versed in the commandments of God. Howbeit, she knows that the Lord hath commanded that a child honor his father and his mother. Wherefore, if you but command her, she may be constrained by the commandment. Therefore, do this thing, Hemen, for the good of the people. 
23 Therefore, Hemen went to Hementim and told her all that the people had said concerning her. And she considered all the words of the people. But behold, she was all the more convinced because of them to go into the Land Northward. 
24 Now this displeased the people, that she should hear and consider their concerns and still be anxious to leave them. But they were satisfied that Hemen had made their appeal to her, and they left off calling upon him to constrain his daughter. 
25 Yea, and some few were ashamed. For, in her response, Hementim showed forth the unsoundness of their desires toward her, and they begged her forgiveness. 
26 Yet, still others took some offense at her reaction, and they detained her until they could take their case before Shiblon, the prophet. And thus they did, saying: 
27 Let not Hementim leave her people, for she is become as a mother and a prophetess unto us, and where shall there be found any like unto her? Wherefore, is it right that she should leave her children alone and succorless? Can you not prevail upon the great woman to stay and not be lost in the wilderness? 
28 And Shiblon rebuked them and called them to repentance. For the Spirit came upon Shiblon and he was filled with a fury come from the Lord. Wherefore, he did straitly rebuke them, saying: 
29 Of a truth, Hementim is the greatest woman in all of our land. Yea, she surpasses the wisdom of the wise. She does far surpass you! Do you suppose that she is some piece of property that you treat her thus? Nay, she is a free woman and is guided from on high. Can you think to call yourselves children and know so little the character of your own mother? Nay! Leave off persecuting the righteous! 
30 Now, the people were exceedingly downcast at his words, and seeing that their earnestness was truly out of love for her, Shiblon counseled them: 
31 Do not shame your love for Hementim in this way. Ought you not to honor her instead. The mothers of the Ammonites have always been most faithful. Was it not by and through their teachings that a race of men such as the Sons of Helaman was raised up to the salvation and good of all? Let Hementim inspire the Ammonites. Yea, let every mother, daughter, sister and wife of the Ammonites aspire to become like unto her. 
32 It is good indeed to have one among us who is good, and kind, and wise, and learned, and strong willed in righteousness. Yea, who will not admit that the Ammonites have one great treasure and her name is Hementim! How great shall be your riches and your joy should all the women of the Ammonites strive to become so good, so kind, so wise, so learned, and so Adamant! 
33 And the saying pleased the people and their eyes were opened, and they saw how foolish and how selfish they had been. For bondage shall always turn great good into ashes, and they saw that their love for Hementim had almost caused them to commit great sin. 
34 Wherefore, Shiblon was pleased also, and smiled on them, and sent them home with an admonition to make peace with the great woman and her father. And they also determined to publish the admonition of Shiblon throughout all the lands of the Ammonites. And this they did to honor Hementim by establishing an order of women dedicated to her teachings and her ideals. And they released Hementim. 
CHAPTER 2 
1 Hemen and his brother Cumeni were among the twelve Lamanites who took their families and went with Hagoth into the Land Northward. And with Hemen went his daughter, Hementim and they were one family, Tore, his wife having died when Hementim was born to her. 
2 With Cumeni, the twin brother of Hemen, went his wife Moah and their sons and daughters. Together they numbered fourteen and they were one family. 
3 Now, Cumeni, the son of Cumeni, was a man and was not numbered among the family of Cumenihah. He also went up with Hagoth and with him went his wife Tsi-Horem and sons and daughters, and they were one family. 
4 Now, Hementim had a sister whose name was Tsi-Nitsunu, whose husband had also fought against the Nephites in the wars but who would not lay down the sword. Wherefore, he did perish in the wars against the Nephites. But, hearing of the covenant that Moroni offered to the Lamanites, she did take all of her family and followed her brother to the land of the Ammonites to enter into the covenant. 
5 Now the son of Tsi-Nitsunu was Shi-Tugo, a man of great stature and renown among the Lamanites. Yea, he did fight valiantly in the war against the Nephites because he believed Moroni and all Nephites to be thieves and usurpers, as he had been taught by his father. Wherefore, he was a man perilous in battle and his deeds were many. 
6 Howbeit, when the Lamanites were being destroyed by the Nephites, and when Moroni called a cease to the work of death, this same Shi-Tugo was in the fore and very close to where Moroni stood. Wherefore, he heard all the words of Moroni's entreaty and covenant, and was pierced to his heart with regret. For it seemed to him that he had been taught a lie all the days of his life. 
7 Wherefore, as he cast his eyes round about him and beheld the carnage, he could no longer believe in the cause of the war, for the words of Moroni were just, and not the words of a thief. And when he saw that a great many of his kinsmen were about to lay down their arms and covenant with Moroni, he joined with those who quit the war. And when this great man did lay down the sword and covenant never to take it up again against the Nephites, a great many of the Lamanites did likewise. 
8 This same Shi-Tugo went up with Hagoth into the Land Northward. 
9 Now, the names of the other eight Lamanites who took up their journey were Huhomeh the smith, and Teacumhah the husbandman, and Shith the potter, and Gidihah the tanner, who later changed his name to Hem-Gadhi because of the Gadiantons, and Jacob, and Set, and Gimlah, who were herdsmen, and Tucemset. They all went up with their wives and families with Hagoth. 
10 But Shi-Tugo had not wife or family and some of the company questioned the wisdom of his setting out alone into the wilderness. Yet, he was a mighty man, a man not unaccustomed to hardship. And he was a leader of men, and one very close to Hagoth. Therefore, none begrudged him his place in the company. But some did question the wisdom of it. 
11 And the number of the Lamanites who went up with Hagoth were sixty souls. 
12 Now, the story of how Hagoth made his journey is written in another place and I shall not repeat it here. It is enough for me to say that the art and knowledge of Hemen and Cumeni were taught to all the people insomuch that all the people became Healers. For, so the Nem continue into this present day. 
13 And where the river Akish turned again northward, where the canyons end, the people of Hagoth built a settlement and established themselves in the land. Every family chose lands and built homes and they began to have commerce with the City of Hagoth at the mouth of the river, and through it, with all the Land Southward. And they did explore in the lands further northward and eastward and they did establish communications with others of the Nephites and Lamanites who had gone into the Way the Land Northward, for many had left the land of their birth in the south and had established themselves in the Land Northward in many places. 
14 Now, Shi-Tugo, the nephew of Hemen, made his home in the lands as far northward as any of the people of Hagoth did establish themselves. Yea, afar to the north did he build a house, and he lived there a lone man. He, alone among the men and women of the Ammonites who had joined Hagoth to sojourn with him, had no family with him. But he would often come down out of his solitude to visit with his kin among the settlements of the People of Hagoth. 
15 And behold, it was upon one of his visits that the people had received news of certain discord which had arisen among the Nephites and the Lamanites of the Land of Zarahemla. Yea, Hagoth had received word from the south and the news had disturbed the thoughts of all the people. 
16 Now, Shi-Tugo was a man alike to Hagoth in stature and in temper. He had been a leader of men, yea, even one of the greatest of the Lamanite captains in the wars against the Nephites. Wherefore, many asked his opinion about the news, and he did strait way answer them, saying: 
17 There have been many wars upon this land since our forefathers made their flight from the Land of Jerusalem of old. Behold, I shall tell you somewhat about these wars and you may believe that what I tell you is true. Yea, listen to my counsel, for I know of war. Each of you have your profession. Some of you are husbandmen and others artificers. But I was not so. My craft was war. Wherefore, listen to me. 
18 All such great wars as fill the remembrance of all our people began from just such little discord and dissensions as of which we now hear among our brethren in the Land Southward. Yea, as soon as they begin to prosper a little, men immediately become filled with pride. Yea, they become lifted up and they esteem themselves greater than their brethren because of their prosperity. Even until they begin to measure each other by their possessions and judge each other by their abundance. 
19 But how shall they judge those who have not? Behold, if you have not what I have you cannot be as I am. And I esteem myself righteous, or at least I do not judge myself because of my riches. Therefore, if I, being righteous, have riches and you are poor, behold, it must needs be that you are wicked because of your poverty. Yea, if righteousness brings prosperity, and yet you remain in poverty, behold your poverty must needs be a sign and token of your secret acts of wickedness. 
20 So do the proud begin to judge the poor. Yea, then does a man begin to say in his heart: 
21 Behold, I shall stay my hand and, even though I have provender enough for three besides myself and mine, I shall not give of my surplus. For, howbeit the three may be poor because they are secretly wicked. Wherefore, they bring upon themselves their own suffering because of their wickedness. They are not like unto me and do not what I do, or behold, they would prosper like unto me. 
22 But behold, they prosper not. Wherefore, if their curse be but a token of their secret deeds, then they are deserving of their suffering. And thus does a proud man judge his neighbor and justify himself. Then do the poor suffer under the heel of the rich until their suffering breaks the yoke. Of such are all wars made. 
23 And the prophetess Hementim, was pleased with these sayings and reasoned with him, saying: 
24 Shi-Tugo, we know that you are a great man of arms and of war, you know whereof you speak. Yet, I perceive that you are also a man of counsel and wisdom. Tell us then, what would you that we should do as a people to avoid such evil? 
25 And he answered her, saying: 
26 Great are the Healers of the Ammonites and for every hurt the Healers have a remedy. Yea, even for war and strife there is a remedy. 
27 And Hementim answered him, saying: 
28 Be now a Healer unto us and teach us this remedy. 
29 For the prophetess perceived his thoughts and knew that he would teach a great thing to the people. Howbeit, if the people should listen to the words of this great man, they might be preserved from falling into the pride of the Nephites. 
30 And again he answered, saying: 
31 Remember you and think upon all the wars of the Nephites and the Lamanites. In each of them one can recall the names of those men who began them and of those men who ended them. Is this not so? 
32 And all the people answered, Yea. 
33 Can you recite to me the names of the women, yea, the mothers with children who started or ended those great conflicts? 
34 And all the people answered, Nay. 
35 And were the rulers elevated by the women, yea, by the mothers who were to provide their sons to be offered up unto their great conflicts? 
36 And the people answered, Nay. 
37 Then I say, when you elevate people to be judges and rulers over you, let them be elevated by the voice of the mothers, and they shall make rulers who shall not make war. For their counsels will ever be the preserving of the children and not the offering them up because of pride. 
38 But Hementim answered him, saying: 
39 Does a woman never become filled with pride then? Nay, Shi-Tugo, for I have seen how women do adorn themselves in fine twined linen and costly things. 
40 Then Shi-Tugo also discerned her thoughts, how that she spoke thus to him only so that the people might think earnestly upon the matter with all seriousness, and he took courage. 
41 Yea, you speak rightly, Hementim. But consider, a mighty man such as myself or Hagoth, might by his prowess in strength or in arms, win himself to the seat of the judge, by the esteem or the fear had by men of such feats. But if he had to win to the seat of power by the esteem of the mothers, he would have to establish to them that his policies would secure the safety of their little ones. 
42 Behold, it is true that women may become puffed up in pride, but are not mothers with children, as a separate class, more generally concerned with the good of the children than are other classes? Or what mother, when asked to give up her young son to war, is not more inclined than any other women to ascertain that the cause of the war be a good cause? 
43 Yea, I tell you, if you would avoid conflict as a whole people, choose you out to make you laws the wise and the charitable. But let them be chosen by the mothers. Let those who have the most to lose choose your rulers. This is the remedy. Then, if the people go down into corruption, it will be because the whole people have fallen even to the last of them, and not because one strong man has usurped the voice of the people. 
44 And all the people were amazed at the man of war among them. For he did hear the voice of the Lord and teach peace to them. Yea, all went away very thoughtful after hearing the words of Shi-Tugo, and many were amazed. 
45 But Hementim published his words to all the people and condoned them. Wherefore, the people did believe in his words and did entreat the mothers to meet together on an appointed day to choose Councils to rule the people of Hagoth. 
46 Now, on the appointed day, even Hagoth and Hemen, Cumeni and Hagmeni, yea, and many other of the chief men, did stand before the mothers and did appeal to them to choose out those that would preserve the peace of the land. For they all believed in the words of Shi-Tugo, and the Spirit witnessed to them that his words were true. 
47 And the mothers did meet and chose out of the people of Hagoth the first of their Councils. And when the Council met for the first time, they chose Hagoth to preside. And behold, all the people were pleased with the choice and they all cried amen together. 
 
CHAPTER 3 
1 Then Hementim looked upon Shi-Tugo with favor, and he, her. For Hementim saw in him a great leader, even one who could command men. And behold, they would do his commands! Yet, she also saw that he was wise in the workings of men. For he knew that, should the people of Hagoth establish themselves after the manner of the Nephites in the Land Southward, they would fall into a pit. Yea, for even as they debated these things, all the people knew that the robbers were becoming strong in all the land. Wherefore, the men who ruled and judged in the Land of our Fathers, yea, and even in many places where the people had established themselves in the Land Northward, were easily made corrupt by the flattery of the Gadiantons. 
2 For this was the manner in which the robbers gained power in all the cities. They first flattered the lesser judges and then they bribed them. Then they enticed them with promises of elevation, substance and power. Thus, their judgment became corrupt. Wherefore, each man, seeing that he could not find justice before the judges, began to seek his own remedy, and thus ended speedily the rule of equity and law. 
3 Then did the robbers gain greater control over the people. For they pointed out the failings of the system and the judges, even though they themselves were the cause of their failure, and excited the people to rebellion and to the raising up of their exciters to the judgment seats. In this way, the robbers established themselves. 
4 Wherefore, Hementim saw that a flaw existed in the system of judges by which the Nephites governed themselves, and that the people of Hagoth needed some modification of the system, else they would continue to do as the Nephites had done. 
5 But Hementim knew that, although she was esteemed highly among the people, she was a woman among a race that had always been ruled by men. Notwithstanding that the people called her name holy and sought her counsel as a prophetess of God, nevertheless, in matters of government, the woman had no voice, and she grieved that the people of Hagoth might wax gross as the people of the Land Southward. 
6 Now, when she saw that the great man, a warrior and a captain of hundreds, would also change the system, she rejoiced in her heart. For she believed Shi-Tugo, that the mothers would not be as easily corruptible and that they would choose those less corruptible to judge in the Councils. And she rejoiced the further that all the people listened to the words of Shi-Tugo and made modification of the system of governance. For, she believed that the change which he had proposed, and to which the people had consented, would some day save them from the threat of the robbers. 
7 Yea, Hementim did look upon Shi-Tugo with exceedingly great favor and Hemen, her father, seeing this, rejoiced also in his heart. For he had despaired of his daughter ever finding a man who was her equal and with whom she might build a life. 
8 Wherefore, Hemen, the Healer, spoke to Shi-Tugo privily and beseeched him regarding his daughter, saying: 
9 Do you not see that I have a daughter that is precious to me? 
10 And Shi-Tugo answered him: 
11 Yea, Hemen, you will recall that I did look upon your daughter in earlier days with much favor, but you dissuaded me saying, she is dear to me. 
12 Whereupon Hemen continued: 
13 Yea, my daughter is a great comfort to me and to this whole people. Behold, have you not heard the people call her prophetess? 
14 And Shi-Tugo answered him carefully: 
15 Yea, Hemen. Your daughter is the jewel of this people. Even I have spoken with her often and have heard her wisdom. In all things she is guided by the voice of God. Wherefore, her people do rejoice in her rightly, and cherish her. She is an ensample to all those among women whom the Lord does call to His service and to His priesthood. 
16 And Hemen answered, saying: 
17 You speak well the feelings of all the people, Shi-Tugo. Verily, the people do greatly esteem my daughter. But she is steadfast in her desire for my comfort even over her own. Many have said, and almost I believe it, that the daughter of Hemen shall never wed and the race of Hemen will disappear from off the face of the earth. 
18 Now, hearing these words, Shi-Tugo was grieved and his countenance fell. But this thing pleased Hemen and he continued encouraged, saying: 
19 Tell me not that you no longer esteem my daughter, Shi-Tugo. 
20 Then with downcast face, Shi-Tugo praised Hementim to her father, saying: 
21 Hementim is the Guide Star and governs all the constellations. I would that she would look upon me, but I know that she is as far from me as that Guide Star is from the ground upon which I stand. 
22 Then Hemen said: 
23 Nay, Shi-Tugo, think not so basely of yourself. For, I am her father and know her thoughts. And have I not seen her 
find much favor in you of late? Yea, can one such as her not have heard the Spirit of God speaking though you? Can a prophetess not discern a prophet? 
24 Then did Shi-Tugo take great courage and entreated Hementim to be his wife, and she consented. Then was the wonder of all the people complete and then was their joy in them made full. For the race of Hemen and of Hementim would go on. And also, the strength of Shi-Tugo would continue. Then did all the people of Hahgohtl feel a premonition that they would all prosper exceedingly in the new land to which the Lord had led them, and they rejoiced. 


CHAPTER 4 
1 Behold, the people of Hagoth were united in all things, yea, even their purpose for traveling into the Land Northward they had in common. For they were led out of the Land Southward by the Spirit, having foreseen that great wickedness and strife would shortly befall the people there because of their pride. 
2 Yea, and we see that their foreknowledge was true, for is it not written in another place how that the Nephites rejected the prophets and cast them out of their cities? And have we not also records of all the cities in the land that will be destroyed because of their wickedness when the Lord comes? 
3 Wherefore, we know that the people of Hagoth were conscious of the coming calamity and for this cause they took their flight into the wilderness of the Land Northward. And when the Councils met, they did often concern themselves with much debate over the news they received from the Land of our Fathers. And it often came to pass that they did call upon Hagoth and Hagmeni, Shi-Tugo and Hementim, yea, and Hemen, Cumeni, Seth, and many others of the wise, to instruct them. And the Councils acted not precipitously, but weighed matters out with great care. 
4 And the Councils saw to it that the people continued in peace and in unity, not by compulsion, but by sound policy and true doctrine. And the people also governed themselves and needed no compulsion. And they continued to have all things in common, wherefore, there was never any needy among them and all prospered exceedingly. 
5 Now, all you who receive these things, consider them in your hearts. Yea, weigh them in the balance. Is it better that a man be compelled by law to do that which is good, or is it better that he be left to act according to his own conscience? Behold, I say unto to you, It is better that he act according to the promptings of the Spirit. And if he do this, he shall have no need of compulsion. 
6 For men are want to lay aside their own reason, and also the responsibility that belongs to them. But remember, men and women are given a thing not offered to the lesser kingdoms. Yea, we may choose our own path. But shall a man choose his path and not be held accountable for it? I say unto you, Nay! Take away this responsibility and the Spirit is grieved. Wherefore, it is good that you who receive these things, and think in your hearts – We will make Councils by which we will govern the people – yea, it is good that you should consider the words of those who acted thus before you and did so in wisdom. 
7 And shall a man render to another the responsibility he alone carries for his choices? Nay! I say unto you again, take away this burden and the Spirit is grieved. And I ask you, of what worth, or of what value is it to meet in councils and to make laws, if in so doing you grieve the Spirit? Can your councils prosper? Behold, I declare this thing unto you, Nay! 
8 Behold, it is the inclination of man to seek his own good and, if needs be, to compel others to it. Without the guidance of the Spirit, the strong shall always compel the weak to their own wills. It is only the Spirit of God that strives with men to change their nature and become godly. Remove the guidance of the Spirit from the wisdom of men and you shall have burned the meal into ash and no goodness shall be found in it. 
9 This is the great counsel of Shi-Tugo and of Hementim. Seek you out of all the people those who are wise and gentle and kind. If this be their natural inclination, how much greater in these virtues shall they wax when they must seek the Spirit of God in all their doings? They shall be expanded in wisdom, knowledge, understanding, discernment, and justice. Thus shall rulers become the servants of the ruled and the people shall be governed without compulsion. 
10 For God compels no one, but saves all the works of His hands. Amen. 


CHAPTER 5 
1 And the Councils saw to it that the people continued in peace and in unity, not by compulsion, but by sound policy and true doctrine. And the people also governed themselves and needed no compulsion. And they continued to have all things in common. Wherefore, there was never any needy among them and all prospered exceedingly. 
2 And behold, the People of Hagoth grew in numbers exceedingly. For, their success was not unknown among certain peoples in the Land Southward, and many people poured into their cities from time to time. 
3 And some of them were Nephites, and some Lamanites. Yea, some were Ammonites, and still others were those who had been driven out of other new cities that had been established in the other parts of the Land Northward. For the Robbers of Gadianton, who were known in the Land Northward as the Gadiantons, were strong and numerous in many places. 
4 Wherefore, in order that no contention of race or birth should arise among them, the People of Hagoth entreated the Councils to decide upon a common name for the People and for the lands they did occupy and possess. 
5 And the Councils considered the matter for the space of many months and decided that they should not adopt the name of any person but that the People of Truth would be the name whereby they would be known, which in the language spoken by the people, was Nemen. And they called their country, the Lands of Nem thereafter, because that in all the earth upon which men exist, the People who are guided in truth by the Spirit walk here. 
6 And behold, the people were pleased and did uphold the decision of the Councils, and they began to call themselves Nem from that day. 
7 So continues the custom today among the people. Wherefore, in many places and among many peoples, the name whereby they are called in their own tongue is The People, or The True People. And behold, this has become a tradition among many peoples in the new land yea, even the Land Northward. 


CHAPTER 6 
1 Now, it came to pass that Hementim and Hemen taught their craft to Shi-Tugo and he became great in the art of healing. Yea, and he also was endowed of God with the gift of healing, insofar that many upon whom he laid his hands were healed. Wherefore, they traveled together and healed the people. 
2 Yea, and they did also travel to other cities in the North Country with which the Nem did do commerce, and they, because of their much travel, did learn the lay of all the land. 
3 And it happened that, as they had taken their journey to visit a city many days' travel to the east of the lands of the Nem, they heard rumor of a country and a nation far to the north and departed from their chosen path and went to seek out the settlement. 
4 And this thing is curious, for they knew little of the people there, whether they were righteous or wicked. Howbeit, they might have fallen into the hands of the Gadiantons! Nevertheless, they being prompted by the Spirit, traveled far into the north to seek out the city of which they had heard but a rumor. 
5 Now, as they went their way, they found that the land opened up into a vast plain as far as the eye could see, even a sea of grain as it were. And upon this plain roamed a kind of large cattle which they had seen but few of in the lands of the Nem. But upon the plains, these cattle were numerous beyond counting. Yea, behold! To look upon the herds was to witness a thing unknown among the people. For, so numerous were the cattle that one was reminded only of a great ocean of black which roamed to and fro upon the plain. 
6 Wherefore, Hemen called the name of the cattle “Oug,” because it reminded him of the depths of the great water. And so they have been called by the people to this day. For in places, to look upon the herds of the cattle was as if to look upon the sea and the sound of their hooves was as the waves of the sea breaking upon the shore. 
7 Now, from the plains they did make their way far into the north of the country, and as they did so, behold, they found many small settlements of people who lived in tabernacles made entirely of the hides of these great cattle. And the people were kind and generous to them, and welcomed them. For, they were all thirsty for news out of the lands to the southward. And Hemen did expound to them all that did transpire in the lands of the Nem. 
8 And behold, wherever they did tarry with the people they found upon the plains, they always heard of the principle city of the plains and of a king who lived in that city. Now this king, the people said, was not born a king but was elevated by the voice of the people. And behold, he was said to rule his people not by commands, but by ensample. Yea, the people extolled him as a Teacher and Priest and they spake much of the miracles he wrought. Wherefore, the people esteemed themselves blessed to have such a one to guide and to govern them. 
9 Yea, all the people throughout that vast land did praise him. Wherefore, Hemen was very desirous to go up unto this king and converse with him. Therefore, he did take Hementim and Shi-Tugo and, having obtained certain guides from among the people, they did quit their meandering journey and did endeavor to arrive at the principal city by a quick and straight route. 
10 Now, this city was called by the people Corian-Co-Hah, after the manner of the Lamanites, and it was far into the north. And it was this place, that with the help of the guides they had obtained from the people of the plains, that the three travelers sought quickly to find. 
11 For the name was not unknown to them. Yea, it was the name of the brother of Shiblon, who had made his journey precipitously into the Land Northward and had never been heard from again. Wherefore, they were exceedingly anxious to know of the city and of its inhabitants. 
12 And when they had traveled for the space of many days, even weeks, they came to a great lake (Lake Superior). Yea, the lake was great, even unto an ocean, and they could not see to the other side of it. Notwithstanding, the waters were pure to drink and not salty. Upon the lake they did take their journey in boats like unto those built by Hagoth, except that they were rather smaller in size. Yea, two men could carry one of these boats upon their shoulders, yet they were tight and could be managed with great ease. Even upon this lake they did travel for the space of many days. 
13 And after traveling in this manner for some time, they came to the side of the lake that gave unto the north and they did carry the boats upon their shoulders and provisions upon their backs. And they did travel for a time on dry land. And when they came again to lakes or rivers, they set themselves upon the waters to travel. Wherefore, they did travel most upon the waters and did progress in their journey exceedingly because of the rapidity of their movement upon the waters. 
14 At length, and after many days travel, they were obliged once again to travel upon the land for a space of time and they did come unto another great body of water. So great was it that again, they could not see the other side thereof. But behold, the water of this great water was salty (the Great Salt Lake) like unto the sea and they believed that they had come unto a great ocean of which they never knew and they were amazed. 
15 Now, this country was one of many rivers, streams, and lakes, and much of it was covered with dense forest. And the travelers were amazed that the land could be so different and so varied from that in which they had first heard rumor of the great king who ruled all the villages and settlements even far away upon the plains. For, they had traveled a far distance and it seemed to them that they were now in a different country entirely. Nevertheless, their guides assured them that this same land was where the principal city of which they had heard was to be found. 
16 But when they looked upon the great sea, and their countenances were filled with amazement, their guides looked on them and said unto them: 
17 This is a protected place where the great waters enter in but the storms do not. Marvel not, for it is but a bay (Hudson Bay) in the great ocean. Upon the shore on the east side of the bay lays the city which you seek. 
18 Wherefore, they went into the city and presented themselves before the King of the land, and he was, indeed, that same Corianton, who was the brother of Shiblon, who was prophet in Zarahemla. And when Hemen had made an obeisance unto this king, bowing down unto him, Corianton went to him and, taking him by the hand, raised him up and said unto him: 
19 Nay, bow not unto me, Hemen, for are we not brothers? Bow not to me, nay, nor unto any man, but only unto God, make your obeisance. Judge no man either greater or lesser than yourself and seek not their esteem either. For such pride in the hearts of men does most often bring about their downfall. Esteem, therefore, only the love of God and seek His regard above all men. 
20 And Hemen said unto him: 
21 Nay, it is fitting that we, coming into your country, should render service unto its sovereign. For so, sir, by the esteem of your subjects and their discourse of you, must lead us to understand you to be, and we do it but to honor you and your station. 
22 But Corianton was displeased with this saying and again entreated them not to bow down unto him, saying: 
23 Consider the wars between the Nephites and the Lamanites. Are they not caused by puffed-up pride? I am a Nephite. And yet, my eyes do see things clearly. Is it not true that the Nephites do become puffed up and gross with pride? Yea, you must admit that it is so. 
24 And when they raise themselves up above their fellows, either because of their superior righteousness, or so they suppose, or because of riches, is this not the cause of much misery and sorrow among those of their neighbors whom they esteem beneath them? And is this not the cause of much contention and strife, even unto the persecuting of the poor and the shedding of blood? 
25 Nay, Hemen, you may bow, and incline, and curtsey, as your custom dictates, but I exhort you – do not create by such traditions standards which your descendants might make into the cause of divisions or castes. 
26 Then Hemen understood the wisdom of Corianton. And Corianton, seeing his willingness to hear him, began to expound upon his meaning, saying: 
27 When I was a younger man, my father, Alma, sent me unto our brethren the Lamanites to preach the word of God unto them. Now, the mission was exceedingly hard and my brothers and I suffered privation, beatings; we were impoverished and starved. In short, for one young as I was, the mission became very hard. Nevertheless, we remained steadfast in our desire that the Lamanites receive that light which comes from a knowledge of God and of His Christ. Wherefore, we were diligent and faithful. 
28 Now, there was a woman whose name was Isabel, and in her company we were always made welcome and she opened her home to us. She had been an harlot but she repented. Nevertheless, her reputation was always esteemed the same after she received the gospel as before, and she was despised by the Nephites. Because she had received the word of God, she was despised by her brethren the Lamanites, and because she had been an harlot, she was despised by the Nephites. Wherefore, her situation became pitiful indeed. Nevertheless, she always opened her door to us and whatsoever she had in the house, she did always offer to us for our comfort. 
29 Now, because of her pitiful state, I did visit her often and did comfort her. But behold, many seeing this did spread abroad the rumor that I did consort with an harlot while presuming to be upon the Lord's errand, and even my own family did condemn me for it for a time. Yea, so sharp were the tongues and so prolific the rumors against me that I was constrained to leave my mission in order that I might find safety for her and peace for myself. For, I had grown to love Isabel and desired not to see her sufferings. 
30 Now, this thing greatly displeased my father and I did receive great chastisement from him. Nevertheless, I must believe that he did not wholly believe the murmurings of the people, for the gifts of discernment were strong in him. Nevertheless, once I had made arrangements for the care of the lady, he did command me straitly to take up and finish my mission to the Lamanites. And behold, I did as my father commanded, and great has been my joy because of it. 
31 But Isabel suffered greatly, for the Nephites into whose care I placed her, esteemed her to be an harlot still, even though she had abandoned her sin and come unto Christ. Yea, they cast her out of the Churches and she was restrained from worshipping and isolated from all fellowship with them. Even they did refrain from any concourse with her and her state became very miserable. 
32 Now, she was a weaver of baskets and her work was exceedingly fine, above all the artisans of the Nephites. But they would not buy her work because she was judged by them beneath their feet and unworthy of their association. And she became poor and wanted much, and had it not been for the little provision that I had made for her, she surely would have perished because of her great want. 
33 Behold, when I did finally return from my mission unto the Lamanites, behold, I found her homeless, friendless, and hungry. Then was I ashamed that I had spent overmuch time crying repentance unto the Lamanites, for barely had I seen anything the like among them as I had seen of this poor woman and her suffering at the hands of the Nephites. 
34 Wherefore, I did take up this poor woman unto mine own bosom and I beseeched her that she become my wife, and we departed out of the Land of my Fathers forever. 
35 Now behold, Hemen was touched by the story and knew that it was true. For, who among the people of the Land Southward had not heard of how the son of Alma, he who ought to have followed his brother as prophet, took the harlot Isabel into the Land Northward was never heard of again? And also, who had not heard of how the prophet Alma, having heard how his harsh words of judgment had driven his son into the wilderness, did believe that he had sent his own son to his death? And believing this did he, of himself, give up his place as the prophet of God and walk into the wilderness never to be seen or heard again? 
36 And Corianton continued his discourse, saying: 
37 Behold how pride and the puffed-up heart did rob the Nephites of the pleasure of God. For is not the repentant made pure? Yea, though your sins be scarlet, they shall be white as snow. Wherefore, is not the harlot become as the virtuous daughter of Israel because of righteousness? 
38 But the Nephites elevated themselves above all else and they were waxed bold in their pride. Howbeit, the blessings and happiness and joy that should have been theirs in the fellowship of a sinner saved, was lost to them. 
39 Wherefore, I would exhort you, Hemen, set not yourself above anyone. And esteem me not higher than yourself. For, of such comes the fall of many houses, even of priests and prophets. Yea, even of kings. 
40 And when Hemen heard these things, he understood the more and wondered at the great wisdom of Corianton. For, he knew of Corianton from the People of Ammon and the rumor was still had among them of the defection of the son of Alma from among the people because of the harlot Isabel. And his heart was sorrowful because of it. For behold, a generation believed the rumor. And he kept all these sayings in his heart and remembered them in later years. 


CHAPTER 7 
1 Now, when Corianton had finished teaching the three travelers, he called to one of his servants to bring Isabel to him that he might introduce his wife to the visitors. And this was done, and behold, Isabel came into the chamber and did embrace the travelers. 
2 Then Corianton and Isabel took Hemen, Hementim, and Shi-Tugo, and showed unto them their city. And behold, it was a beautiful city, and the houses and the synagogue were constructed all of wood, of cloth, and of cement. Now, notwithstanding the coldness of the climate, and it was exceedingly cold during the winter, the homes were not cold. For Corianton had taught his people to first construct the framework of their homes of wood timbers. And then the walls were fashioned of thick cloth which was made of the bark of a certain tree, and this formed the inner walls. And upon these walls of cloth, cement was laid in layers until the exterior walls were as thick as a man's hand with the fingers outstretched. Now, because of this curious workmanship, the homes and other buildings were warm in the winter and cool in the summer. This was the manner of workmanship of the people of Corianton, and Shi-Tugo learned it of Corianton and kept in his heart to use later when he returned to his own people. 
3 And when the Sabbath came, they went with Corianton and his family up to the synagogue to worship. And behold, the people did all extend the arm and take each other by the right hand at their first meeting and they did embrace each other often. And they did offer up their hearts unto the Lord with much singing and prayer. 
4 And behold, the people did live by the Spirit and the priests did exhort them to look forward steadfastly to the coming of the Savior. And again, they did pray much and sing much, and they did prophesy much. Yea, there was much prophecy spoken, even from the youngest to the oldest, both men and women, hale and halt, and all did rejoice exceedingly. 
5 Then, when they had returned to the home of Corianton, Isabel began to make preparations for a special worship. She gave unto Hemen, Hementim, and Shi-Tugo long robes of soft cloth which were of curious and fine workmanship. And she gave them droughts of bitters to drink. And when they had done this, she led them into a garden near the home where Corianton had built a great fire. And beside the fire was a small tabernacle made of branches and covered all about with the same cloth with which the people constructed their homes and other buildings, except that no mud was laid upon it. 
6 And Hemen recognized that this was the small tabernacle of the Ammonites which they used for purification. For behold, the People of Ammon desired much to become like unto the Savior. And they knew that He would make an atonement for all people. Behold, they believed that all people would become one people, yea, those who walk on legs and speak, as also they who walk on legs but speak not. Yea, even the four legged and the feathered two leggeds, and the fish and the creeping things. Even the plants and the trees, and the rocks of the earth, yea, and in fine, all things that are and ever were created. 
7 Yea, the People of Ammon desired to emulate the Savior in all things and, when the prophets taught them of the tabernacle that Moses built in the wilderness, they did inquire of the Lord and the Spirit did answer them and gave unto them the manner in which they might more completely purify themselves before the Lord. 
8 And behold, they went down together into the small tabernacle and Corianton brought in stones which had been heated in the fire until they were all exceedingly hot. And they did all suffer the heat together with rejoicing and sacred song, and with much thanksgiving, and prayer, even until they did sweat from every pore. Now, when they had sweated exceedingly, and rejoiced with prophesying and prayer, they did all come up out of the tabernacle together. And their hearts were not heavy for the suffering they had each sustained, but they did rejoice the more and embraced each other. For, they were filled with the Holy Ghost. 
9 And in this manner did the three sojourners learn the manner of worship used by the people of Corianton and it did not displease them, for the Lord had shown it to the people through His Spirit. Yea, and it was like unto the worship of the Nem. For, they had also among them the purification of the Ammonites and it did please the Lord to instruct them also in its use. Wherefore, the sojourners were pleased in the things that Corianton showed unto them, and remembered them, and they wrote them. 


CHAPTER 8 
1 Now, it was during this time that Hementim conceived and was with child. Wherefore, they determined that they would remain with Corianton until the child should be born and grow a little. 
2 For, the journey back to the Nem was long, and they feared that, ere the mother and child recover and gain their strength, some mischief might come of it if they took their journey to return too soon after that Hementim was delivered. Wherefore, they did remain with Corianton and Isabel for the space of three years. 
3 And during the time they remained in the city of Corianton, Shi-Tugo became exceedingly skilled in the manner of building employed by the people of Corianton and also he did learn to fashion the cloth used in the building of their homes and buildings, and this cloth was fashioned of the bark of a certain tree. And Hementim taught the art of the Healer to many in the house of Corianton and in the city. 
4 Hemen did study the writing of the people and did teach unto them the history of Hagoth and of the Nem. Yea, and thus did they spend their time, and happy and prosperous were all their days while in the city of Corianton. 
5 And Hementim brought forth a daughter and called her name Cumenca. This same Cumenca was my mother. And when the mother and child were sufficiently strong, they gathered a delegation of the people of Corianton and they took once again their journey toward home. And so large was the delegation, and so numerous the wagons, that they appeared as a small army upon the ground. Yea, for Corianton desired to end his exile and that of his people, and to come once again into contact with other peoples. Wherefore, he sent many emissaries and much trade with them. 
6 Now, this caused no small stir among the Nem when they arrived again into the part of the country wherein they had built their settlements. For, they appeared as an army and some fear went up among the Nem. 
7 But behold, Shi-Tugo, seeing that the Nem did come out to meet them, discerned their fear, and he caused that his own standard be lifted up. Now, when the Nem saw the device of Shi-Tugo flying before the host, they were filled with joy. And behold, the rumor of it raced from house to house, and all the people came out to greet the returning sojourners. And their joy at the return of their beloved ones was so great that they came out singing and with much sounding of trumps and beating of drums. 
8 And they met them on the plain on the east of the principle settlement of the Nem and behold, all the people were present. Wherefore, the travelers were also filled with joy at the sight, and the people of Corianton who were with them marveled at the sight. 
9 And behold, this is the history of the union of the Nem and the people of Corianton. For, when, after a season of trade and commerce, Corianton caused that his people be joined with the Nem and they all became one people and one nation. And this nation began to grow very quickly and settlements and villages began to spread out across the plains between the principal settlement of the Nem and the principal City of Corianton. 
________________




________________


THE SECOND BOOK 
OF SAMUEL THE LAMANITE 
THE SON OF CUMENCA, WHO WAS 
THE DAUGHTER OF SHI-TUGO
 
CHAPTER 1 
1 Behold, I am Samuel, whom the Nephites call Samuel, the Lamanite, and I have written somewhat about some of my people. For, I would not that my descendents forget the history of their fathers, and I would assure the memory of these happenings. 
2 And I did write concerning my grandparents when I was but a youth. For it seemed to me that not much was remembered about Shi-Tugo and Hemen. And I desired that some record be contained of them in the histories that my own posterity might someday read. Wherefore, the first of my writings I did record many years ago. 
3 Now behold, I do continue to make my record. But now I am old and, whereas my first record I did write with the spirit of youth and having all my life ahead of me, this record I do make when I am old and coming to the end of my life. Yea, my first record I did dedicate to some of the works of my forefathers, that my children might remember them more as I did. This work I write so that my descendents might have record of my doings. For, I shall soon go the way of all the earth. 
4 Now, Alma who was the prophet of God in Zarahemla took Zoreth, of the House of Mosiah, to wife, and they bore sons and daughters. And Corianton was the son of Alma and Zoreth, and he took to wife Isabel, who was said by all to be an harlot. But behold, she repented and was made holy by her faith in the living God. And Corianton and Isabel bore but one son and one daughter. And they called their son Alma, and their daughter they called Pa Samentim. And this Alma took Pa Cumenca, the daughter of Shi-Tugo and Hemen, of whom I have written, to wife and they had one son and one daughter. And I am the son of that Alma and that Pa Cumenca. 
5 Wherefore, I do claim the lineage of my fathers, even of Nephi and Lehi of old, and also of Mulek and of Levi. And it was this same lineage whereby my forefathers of old were called to be priests and prophets unto the people. Therefore, when my God does command me to speak, I do open my mouth. And behold, when my God does command me to write, I do take up my stylus and I do write the things He commands me. And I make no excuse for the things that I write unto the generations of my own posterity, unto whom I know this record will come. 
6 Now behold, I will write somewhat about my own work and the small work with which the Lord did see fit to burden me during the days of my life. 
7 Behold, while I was laboring in the Way, the Lord did call out to me and did take me by the hand. And He did command me in a vision and a revelation to go down even unto the Land Southward and to testify against the Nephites, more principally against the inhabitants of the city of Zarahemla. And behold, I did not refuse my God, but I did take my journey into the Land Southward to do as He commanded me. 
8 And I am a Lamanite in appearance. For my mother descended from those Lamanites who covenanted with Moroni never to take up the sword again against the Nephites. And they became numbered among the Anti-Nephi-Lehies, who are now called the Ammonites. And my father is the son of Isabel who listened to the voice of the Savior when Alma, the prophet, did send his sons unto the Lamanites to preach the gospel of peace unto them. 
9 Wherefore, my skin is dark, as is my hair. And behold, I do appear in all ways as the Lamanites do appear, except in that my eyes are gray instead of brown. And when I went unto the people of Zarahemla, I was young and of goodly stature. Wherefore, the people hardly listened to my words because I was not aged and because I was a Lamanite. 
10 But, notwithstanding these difficulties, I did go down to the Land Southward as the Lord did command me and I did preach and prophesy against them even according to His word to me upon the Way. And the words of my prophesying are had in another book and in another place. 
11 It is enough for me to say that, when I had completed the work which the Lord had commanded me to do in Zarahemla, I did speedily return unto my own country and my own people. For, the Lord had also shown me in a dream what would befall the people of Zarahemla should they reject my words. And behold, except for a very few who were righteously awaiting the coming of the Lord, the people did reject my words, and they did become gross in their iniquity. 
12 And behold, when I had again returned into the Land Northward, I did stop for a time in the city of Mentina and I did preach all that the Lord had shown me to the people there, my brethren. And behold, the Nem believed my words and they did exercise much faith in God. And they did rejoice in the knowledge of the signs that would betoken His birth into the world. 
13 But I would have you know how beautiful it is to speak the words which the Lord has given unto they who believe in Him, and who wait upon Him. And how precious does the word become, and how it expands in the heart when taught to His little ones. 
14 And the Nem did cause that I should sit in the temple and teach the children all the things the Lord had spoken unto me. And they did sit at my feet and loved to hear the promises of the coming of the Christ. 
15 How different were my days in Mentina from my sojourn in Zarahemla. For in the Land Southward the people were puffed up with pride and they sought not the Christ nor did they await the day of His coming. And my words did stir them up to violence, and they did seek to take away my life. 
16 But behold, in Mentina the people did rejoice to hear of the coming of their Savior. Yea, instead of arrows and swords, my words were met with songs of joy and thanksgiving. And thus we see the difference between the Nem and the people of Zarahemla. 
17 How the words of peace do elevate a people! But when the people are puffed in their pride, they cannot hear the words nor feel the peace of the gospel. I would that all my posterity know of the pride of the Nephites and how that pride led to their destruction. For, Zarahemla was destroyed! But Mentina was elevated. 
18 Wherefore, all my descendents, read the history of your own relations and learn from them. Let not your hearts become puffed up. Be not filled with pride. Judge not in the manner of the Nephites, but let your judgment be guided by the Holy Ghost. For, they had much revelation and surely the Lord did teach them through His servants the prophets. But they would not listen, nor would they be instructed. 
19 And when a young man, and a Lamanite, I came to them with words of peace and of warning, the Nephites shot arrows and sought my life. But behold, the Nem upheld me. They, who were puffed up in the pride of their hearts, and whose hearts were set upon the things of the world, shot darts and arrows at me when I stood upon the wall of the city. But they whose hearts were set upon pleasing God and His Christ, did sit with me in the temple. Be you like unto the Nem. For if you become as the Nephites, your fate shall also be as theirs. You cannot please the world and also please God. You cannot think to heap up to yourselves the treasures of the world, for God cannot be bought with money. 
20 The Nephites cast stones at me and sought to destroy the work of God. But, I ask you, did their efforts prevent the birth of the Christ? Did their gold and their silver buy them one more day? I say unto you, It did not buy them anything. Wherefore, you who read this book, ponder these things in your hearts. For if you live your life measuring time by the heaping up of your gold and your silver, you shall not buy one day more than the Nephites did with all their riches. 


CHAPTER 2 
1 Now, after I had spent a season with the Nem in Mentina, and the time of cold having passed, I did return once again to my own country. Yea, I did travel across the plains and into the North Country. And I did come once again to the forests and the streams and lakes where I spent the years of my childhood. Yea, I did return again to the city of Corianton. 
2 And when I returned, as my father Alma did greet me, he did fall upon my neck and we wept together. For he did not ever think to see me again. And indeed, I did not ever think to see him. But, while passing the gates of the city, the heralds, discovering my name, began to advertise throughout the city that I had returned unto my own land and my own people, and my father did hear their cry and came running to meet me. And he did cry out my name and did immediately fall upon me and embraced me. 
3 And great was my joy at being received thus by all the people and more principally by my father. For great is the love that I feel for him and for all of my family. 
4 But the news that he gave me was not all good. For he told me of how my mother and sister had gone to visit the people of Mentina and how on the journey toward that city, they came upon an immense herd of cattle. And the cattle did begin to run before them and turned into them and they were killed. 
5 Now was my joy turned to sorrow, for I loved my mother and sister. And behold, they were of themselves great healers and teachers, and the people did also greatly mourn the loss of such elect ladies from among them. But I especially did suffer from their loss, for though I had returned unto my own people and unto my own city, yet did I feel alone because of the loss of my family. 
6 Yea, how low were my spirits in the days that followed. For, although the people did celebrate my return and many of my people did come to visit me to counsel with me, yet did I feel downcast because of my loneliness and because of my yearning for my mother and sister. Even did I consider doing as Alma had done when he discovered that his judgment of Corianton and Isabel was based not upon the Spirit but upon the rumors of men. Yea, I did consider taking myself off into the wilderness and ending my life there even as he did when Corianton and Isabel did abandon the Nephites and disappeared into the Land Northward never to return. 
7 For, Alma believed that he had sent them into the wilderness to their deaths and the knowledge that he had misjudged them did break his heart. Even so did I feel that my heart would break. 
8 But behold, the Lord would not that I should waste away in despair. Nay, He did lift up my head and lighten my heart. For He did speak to me upon the Way and I did see all that would befall my people. Then did I take courage, for, I knew that He would come to visit His people and I desired to be with them when He did. 


CHAPTER 3 
1 And it came to pass that my father was the Chief High Priest of the People of Corianton. Now, the people whom Corianton discovered in the wilderness were not united in any way, and they did often go up to battle against their neighbors. But Corianton taught them to be unified and to love one another. And they became a great people, a people who loved peace. And behold, they did make him to be a king unto them. 
2 But when the people of Corianton joined with the Nem, and became Nem, they no longer raised up kings unto themselves, but adopted the ways and customs of the Nem. And from that day, Corianton became the High Priest of the Nem of Corianton, and so also his children after him. Wherefore, my father, Alma, the son of Corianton, had the people also chosen to be High priest unto them. 
3 Now, at the time in which I had returned unto my own people, my father had grown old and he was exceedingly frail of body. Wherefore, he did ask the people to seek the guidance of the Spirit in the choosing of one to sit in the seat of the High Priest in his stead. For he was tired and knew that he would soon go the way of the world. Wherefore, he asked the Council of Corianton to meet and to choose a new High Priest for the city. 
4 But behold, they forestalled him. For, the Spirit constrained them to patience. Wherefore, they told my father that the Spirit would have none as Chief High Priest but him. And this thing did displease my father, for it was hard for him to believe that the Council could be so deaf to the Spirit. For he believed that the Council, if they had ears to hear, would hear exactly as he did. Now, in this his judgment was flawed. 
5 And is it not often so? Do we all not believe that because we see a thing that every other person who looks upon it shall perceive the same thing? But behold, it is not so. For each person sees from their own place and we must be careful not to allow our own vision to dictate the sight of another. Let each stand in his lot and endure the gifts he shall have received from the Spirit. And let not one man judge another in matters of perception. For, we have not all things before us. Nay, we see not the end from the beginning. Wherefore, how may we judge? 
6 But behold, my father did judge. For, had the Spirit not told him that his time had come? And if the Spirit spoke thus to him, then why not to the Council? And he continued to press the Council for someone to replace him. For, he knew not that I would return. And indeed, he feared to hope that I would ever be seen again in my own city. 
7 But behold, when I had returned and the noise of my return had died down somewhat, the Council announced that they had once again imposed upon the Spirit to ascertain who might be called upon to fill the seat of the Chief of the High Priests. And behold, they did choose me to fill that seat. 
8 Now was my father’s joy returned to him. For, he knew that the Lord is with me and that the Council could still feel the guidance of the Spirit. And this did fill my father with great joy. For he did often wonder if the people would continue to follow the way of peace. And in this decision the people did demonstrate that the Spirit did still strive with them. 
9 But my father did also learn a great thing in that day. For, he had judged the Council, and wronged them in his heart. This lesson have I carried with me since that day. And behold, I would that you also remember these things. For, if I judge another because of my own knowledge and my own understanding, how much more shall I be judged by that One who does have all things before Him? How flawed shall my judgment appear to me then, when I, too, shall see the end from the beginning, and also my error! 
10 Wherefore, I was called to sit in the seat of my father as the Chief of the High Priests of Corianton, but behold, I am doubtful that I could ever truly fill the seat as my father did. For my father was a man who lived day to day in the presence of the Spirit. And he did teach me to seek the face of my Creator. Yea, and he did teach me while yet a small child to seek the Lord upon the Way. Wherefore, I wonder if I can ever really teach as he did. Nevertheless, it became my desire to fill the high seat as he had done. 
11 And behold, I hope that I may say that I have done so. For, in the years of my stewardship, the people of Corianton have continued to strive with all their might to follow the council of the Spirit and of the prophets. And surely, we have not been found guilty of that which the Nephites did. For, we have always received the prophets of God and never have we sought to cast them out from among our presence. 
12 Yea, and on occasion, the people have begun to puff themselves up in pride. For, one thing that is certain is that when a people seek to follow the Lord, He does assuredly bless them and prosper them abundantly. And with abundance does often come pride. And we have at times been guilty of pride. But as often as the Lord has sent among us prophets to warn us of our pride, the people of Corianton have always received them and blessed them. 
13 And behold, when they have taught us to repent of our growing pride, we have undertaken to repent. And when they have taught us to render service unto our fellow sufferer, we have undertaken to serve. And when they have taught us to give of our abundance, we have undertaken to give of all our surplus to those who have not. Wherefore, I hope to say that the people of Corianton have lived the precepts of God. At least, we have undertaken to strive to do so. 
14 And during the time of my stewardship, I did strive to keep the people in remembrance of all the doings of our forefathers. Wherefore, I did travel often to Mentina to make copies of the records kept there. And especially to take counsel with Oug, the High Priest of the Nem of Mentina. And behold, he did assist me in creating a library of all the books kept in Mentina for the use of the people of my city. 
15 And behold, I did set aside a beautiful place where this library could be kept safe. And the place was some distance away from the city. For, it seemed to me expedient for my people to travel to the place of safekeeping to make copies of the works. In this, I thought, the people by their sacrifice to obtain the records might find in them greater worth. And this proved to be so. For, as the people made pilgrimage to the place where the records were kept, and they did sacrifice of themselves to do it. And their sacrifice was accepted by the Lord, and they were blessed. 
16 Now, the place that I set aside for the safekeeping of the records is called Cumorah, and I named it thus by the commandment of God. For, the Spirit did speak to me in a vision of a hill by such a name which would hold the records of the people until the day of restoration. Wherefore, I did call the place after this strange name, and it was so known among all the people of Corianton. 
17 And the place was very well suited for this purpose. For, there was in the hill which I called Cumorah, a deep cavity of rock. And it formed a corridor and a great room. And there was no spring or issue of water in the cavity. Wherefore, the place was safe and dry. And behold, it was large enough to hold all of the books, the plates and the scrolls that the Spirit saw fit to cause me to deposit there. 
18 And behold, the books do number a great many indeed. And they do profit my people greatly for the store of knowledge contained in them. Knowledge of the grandfathers that does sustain my people in a remembrance of all that the Lord has taught His people from the time He did drive Lehi and his family into the wilderness. Yea, and even from before that time. 
19 Now, this place is sacred to the Nem of Corianton. For it contains the sacred writings of our fathers. And in the cavity are found copies of the Brass Plates, which Lehi, our father, brought with him from the land of Jerusalem. And these are the plates that Nephi, his son, obtained at great cost to himself. 
20 For behold, the Spirit did constrain Nephi to take the blood of a man in order that the people might not dwindle in unbelief. How great a cost was this to the boy Nephi! For never before had he done any man to death, and yet, the Spirit did constrain him to do that which repelled him the most. For, Laban had stolen all that Lehi and his family possessed and still Nephi did not adjudge him worthy of death. Yea, and Laban had sought to take away his life, and the life of his brethren, and yet, Nephi did not judge him. But, Laban did pronounce a kind of spiritual death upon all the descendents of Lehi. In this, the Lord did judge him, and He delivered him into the hands of the boy, and He did command the boy to take away his life. How hard a commandment must that have been for the tender heart of Nephi! 
21 But it is sometimes so. The Lord knows our hearts, and sometimes He does command us to do hard things. And behold, sometimes we cannot see the rightness of the commands until after we have either obeyed His will or abandoned Him and sought our own understanding. 
22 And behold, Cumorah did hold all the writings of the Nephites up unto the time that Hagoth took his journey into the wilderness, and also unto the time that Corianton left his father’s city. And the records of the house of Hagoth are had in part also in the cavity of Cumorah. 
23 But this is not all. The books written by the Brother of Jared are also safely kept in Cumorah against the day when all the Lord’s teachings may be restored to the people. For the day shall come, after that the Lord has tested and tried the remnant of the children of Israel left in this land, that He will cause even Cumorah to give up her treasure. Yea, He will lead a prophet by the hand and even the words and works of the Brother of Jared shall be had again among the people. 
24 And the words and works of the Brother of Jared were so great that even in my day, I do not allow all to read of them, and no copies are made of them. Nevertheless, I do know that in a day appointed of the Lord, some small portion of his words shall be made known and shall be had among men. And this shall be a great benefit to the children of men. Yea, and it shall also be to the testing and the trying of the children of Israel that are left in this land in the last days. I know this, for I have seen those days upon the Way, and the Spirit has born record of it. 
25 Now, the cavity of Cumorah does also contain all the records of the Nem of Corianton. For, it is our custom that every house should keep a record of their doings. Wherefore, in all our cities and in all our villages, there are set apart historians to keep the records of the people. And all these records are kept in the cities themselves, but also are copies kept safe in Cumorah. 
26 But I say unto you, this is not all. For from time to time, it has been the pleasure of the Lord to send unto us teachers from afar off. Yea, men and women who are great in Spirit and in wisdom have been guided by the Lord unto us from time to time. And oft times we know naught of the land from which they come, but we do receive them and succor them. And we have made it our custom to sit at their feet and learn from them all that they might teach us. And behold, we do record their words also and keep them. 


CHAPTER 4 
1 Behold, I did make every effort, while I sat in the seat of the High Priest, to stay in contact with my brethren in the west. But, it became increasingly difficult to do so because of the encroachment of the Gadiantons in the land. For, many Nephites had also migrated to the Land Northward because of the Gadiantons in the south. But they did also build settlements and they did engage, as might be expected, in trade. Now, as this trade did increase, the smell of it did reach the noses of the Gadiantons of the south and they did begin to make their way even into the lands of the Nem. 
2 But, the people of Mentina did send men of renown to teach them the gospel of peace and to bring them into the fold of the Nem. And these men were great in stature and strong. And behold, they were also waxed great in the preaching of the word, insomuch as many of the Gadiantons that heard their preaching did turn from their evil and become part of the community of the Nem in the Land Northward. 
3 But many of them did not turn in their ways, but continued to conspire to take away that which the people labored to bring about through peace. These, the preachers sought out and destroyed. Wherefore, in all the histories of the descendents of Lehi there have not been such preachers in the land. Yea, and in all the records there have been none like unto them. For they did labor with all love to convert the Gadiantons. And their words were mighty to the convincing of many, and indeed, to the salvation of many. But they so loved their country and their brethren; yea, so much did they love the peace of the land and the tender hearts of the little ones, that they did take their lives into their hands as an offering unto the Lord and they did fight with their might to preserve the peace, and the right of every person to peace. Wherefore, unto those who would not repent, they were like the whirlwind. And in this way was the scourge of the Gadiantons kept back from our gates for many years. 
4 But behold, I say unto you, even their efforts were not enough to hold back the tide of iniquity that would befall all the people. For the Land Northward was rich and beautiful, and there was nothing rich and beautiful that the Gadiantons did not yearn to possess. And they made secret covenants one with another to destroy the people out of the Land Northward and to take of all its bounty unto themselves. 
5 Wherefore, did the Nem of the mountains remove themselves very early on in the history of their sojourn in the Land Northward, into fast places. Yea, they did leave their settlements wherein they first inhabited the land, and some of those settlements exist to this day, all intact as if the inhabitants left but for a season. Yea, so suddenly did they depart that one almost feels their presence still when walking down the abandoned streets of their fair settlements and villages. 
6 But their departure was wisdom in them. For, they did place deserts and high mountains between them and the Gadiantons, and they who did not thus, hardly escaped the coming tempest. And the deserts and mountains proved costly to conquer and the Gadiantons went elsewhere to despoil and plunder. 
7 Yea, and likewise did we, the people of Corianton, find that the Great Plains proved a bulwark between us and the Gadiantons. And we were preserved for many years from their encroachment. And we did trade with the Nem by routes which we did cunningly devise and which we guarded diligently. 
8 But, notwithstanding our efforts, we knew that it might become increasingly difficult to maintain close contact with our brethren in the west. Wherefore, it seemed wise to me to provide entirely for ourselves and to maintain our self-sufficiency even while we worked to maintain trade with the Nem in the mountains. Wherefore, in all that we could, we sought to produce our own goods and to serve each other in our villages and in our cities. 
9 For, I did distrust any system that might bring the people of Corianton into any kind of bondage. For it is upon such things that the Gadiantons build their power. Wherefore, if we had the capacity to grow a kind of food that we favored, we strove to grow it in our own country. And if we had the capacity to make cloth of our own, we made cloth. And we built our homes out of materials close to home. And we raised our own cattle and horses, and the like. 
10 And when we had a surplus, we did trade with our brethren in the west. But we did not depend on them, nor did we try to develop a dependence on their part upon the things we did produce. In this way we did all work to maintain the peace and freedom of our land and of our society. 


CHAPTER 5 
1 Now, I did fill the seat of the Chief of the High Priests for many years, and 
behold, I did strive to do my duty to my people and to my God. And I did teach the gospel of peace to the best of my understanding, relying upon the Holy Ghost to guide me. And behold, the Nem of Corianton were diligent in keeping the commandments of God and we did strive to keep the Sabbaths and the festivals. And in all things, I did preserve the belief and the customs of my fathers alive in the hearts of the people. 
2 Notwithstanding, I did also strive to preserve the rights of all people to receive revelation and inspiration from God. For, for this cause has God striven always with men, so that they might come unto Him. Wherefore, I made no laws concerning the observance of rites, but did exhort all people to approach God honestly with all their hearts and minds. And behold, the Lord did bless and reward the people, and the gifts of the Spirit were had by us in great abundance. 
3 Now, I judge myself in this and hope that I do rightly. For, I perceive that my people were very happy, and they walked uprightly before the Lord. And they had for their needs in great abundance. Yea, there were never any poor among our people and in our cities and villages, so long as the want was known. For, as soon as any want was found among our people, the people themselves quickly provided for that want without need of commandment. And this was taken up as the great challenge of our whole people – that there should never be found any poor in any of our cities. 
4 And again I say that I judge myself in this thing and hope that I have always done rightly in my work in the seat of the Chief of the High Priests. And I measured myself in this. For, if the people, whom it was my responsibility to teach, did govern themselves in righteousness, then I could esteem that I had not taught them amiss. 
5 And I did take Hemina, the sister of my friend and fellow servant Oug, to wife, and she was a great and noble woman of high renown among her own people. Wherefore, when she consented to seal her fate with me, I did esteem myself blessed beyond all men. Yea, the Lord did greatly bless me in the day that Hemina consented to be my wife. And she also did measure herself against the love demonstrated by the people, for she did exert herself to be the mother of all and to care for all. 
6 And she brought to our hearth but one child and we did call his name Corianton after my own grandfather. And I did also teach him to likewise measure himself upon this rod as well. And behold, my own son did grow in this wisdom, even to the stature of a man. And he took to him Sabel, the daughter of Oug to wife. And such a man did he become that all the people of Corianton esteemed him equal to me in knowledge and wisdom, and in application. Yea, he did wax strong in body and wise in mind. Yet, he was also gentle in his disposition so that he did understand the worries and the hurts of all men. And he cared for his people and worked for them with all his might. 
7 Yea, if I may boast in anything, and I know the danger in such pride, I say unto you, I do boast in the goodness of my wife and of my son. And how I do bless the Lord for the gift He gave me to comfort me. For, I did not marry as a young man and I thought not to have any issue at all. But behold, the Lord did guide unto me the most elect of ladies, and she did bear a son of high renown, one who brought much honor to the name of the Lord. And what greater reward may a father receive of the Lord than that his child be found acceptable before his Creator? 
8 Nay, there is no other thing of worth in all the world than that a man may see his works reflected in the hearts of his children and of his people, and that the works that he sees are good. In this do I praise the name of the Lord and bless Him every day of my life. Yea, I shall always bless and praise the Lord. 
9 And when I became old, and my eyes did grow somewhat dim, the people of Corianton did call forth my son to occupy the seat of the Chief High Priest with me, to assist me in the work of the Lord. Behold, is this not blessing indeed? Look upon me, all you fathers who have children, and judge me as a father. Judge not in the pride of your hearts, but as one father does judge another. Did I well in life, think you? If we fathers may measure our lives in any way, let us do it through our families. For, if my children please the Lord, what more can I have done? Or what other success may I have obtained? Indeed, what other thing could be more precious? I say unto you, Let no other thing be used to judge the father, than that his children find favor with God. 


CHAPTER 6 
1 Now, it was while I labored as High Priest to the people of Corianton, before the year wherein my father returned unto our fathers, that the signs which I had prophesied unto the people of Zarahemla concerning the birth of the Christ were accomplished. And when my son Corianton and I did labor together in that capacity the signs of His death came, and the people were amazed and affrighted. 
2 But behold, the Spirit did whisper peace to our minds and to our souls so that we did patiently bear the day, the night, and the day of darkness. For, though the occurrence was frightful, still, the Spirit did sing a song of sweet redemption to our souls. And many dreamed dreams and saw visions. And even some few did receive commandments as to what should be done when the Lord did come to visit the people of Corianton. 
3 And He did come unto us, in accordance with the visions that I too had received when I was but a young man. For, we had gathered together to worship when the signs came. Yea, and all the people in the cities had gathered to Corianton. And all the people in the forests had gathered, and also from the lakes and rivers. And we were all together, a great concourse of people awaiting the coming of the Lord. 
4 And we did hear His voice from afar off and we did shout with joy when we heard it. For, it caused our hearts to leap. Yea, our hearts did leap within our breasts and nothing could have prevented us from crying out our joy when we heard His voice. 
5 But the voice was first a voice of warning unto all those who did wickedness. And from this we understood in our hearts that not all the wicked were destroyed. But behold, many were destroyed, even the most part, and that so that all might have one or many accounts to tell of the signs that preceded the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. And the voice was as the voice of an angel, not of a trump, or of thunder. But it did pierce us to the core. And behold, the voice did also separate the good from the bad. For, those who feared the retribution of a just God, trembled and sought to hide themselves. Yea, and they were filled with great loathing to see Him. But those who did good works were filled with joy and they ran out into the streets and clearings to see what was about to befall. Yea, they welcomed their Lord with praise and singing. 
6 And in the day that He did come amongst us, and it was not long after the signs of His death had abated, we did according to the things we had been commanded in the visions and revelations that many had received during the days of darkness. 
7 Behold, we did greet Him as our King and our Great High Priest. And I did take Him by the hand and I did lead Him to the seat of the Chief of the High Priests. And I did place upon Him the robes of the High Priest and He did sit upon the seat. And behold, I did declare to all the people that this was the Christ, the Son of the Living God; He who was killed by His own; He who had paid the uttermost price for our redemption and who had sealed it with the sacrifice most dear. And the people did gather to the Temple of Mentina to see Him and to hear His words. 
8 And behold, my son Corianton did approach the seat and, bowing himself down before his Lord, he did wash His feet, hands, and head, and he did anoint Him with oil most precious. And when he had done this, the Lord did place His hands upon the head of Corianton and blessed him, and bid him arise. 
9 And behold, Sabel approached also the seat and bowed herself down before the Lord. And she did break bread and blessed it, as she had been taught to do upon the Way. And she offered it to the Lord, and He did eat. And she did pour out pure wine into a grail and blessed it, as she had been taught to do upon the Way. And she offered it to the Lord, and He did drink. And when this was done He took her by the hand and arose from the seat. And He said in the hearing of all the people gathered there: 
10 Behold, this is well, what these two have done unto me. For they did approach me upon the Way. Yea, they did seek my face and I did acknowledge them. And behold, I did teach them these things upon the Way when I did show myself unto them who sought me. Let them be an ensample unto all those who would come unto me and diligently seek me. Unto such shall I give my kingdom. Yea, of such shall I make up my jewels. 
11 And behold, when He had said these words, He did join the hands of Corianton, my son, and Sabel, and presented them together to the host, saying: 
12 These two have become First Man and First Woman. Surely, they shall always administer my sacraments together. For, the one is not without the other in me. Wherefore, I shall bless and sanctify all that they do. 
13 And unto the two, He said: 
14 Go now and do like as you did unto me also unto all this people, teaching them to do likewise unto every person. 
15 And they went straightway and ministered unto the people, teaching them the ordinance of these two sacraments. And when they had done this and returned again, He turned again unto me and said: 
16 Are there any sick and afflicted among you? Let them come up unto me and I will bless them. And by their faith, they shall be made whole. 
17 And we did cause that all those who were sick and afflicted to approach Him and He was pleased. For there were not so many who were sick and afflicted because of the many healers that worked their gifts among us. But there were some who had met with accidents who were halt and some who had complaints that they had borne for many years for which the Healers had no cure. But behold, these were not many. 
18 Now, when they had approached the Lord, He did lay hands on them and lessed them. And behold, they did arise and were free of their afflictions. And this was a great confirmation of what we had always believed about the Lord, that He is mighty to save both quick and dead. And we rejoiced in this affirmation. 
19 And when He had blessed all the sick and the afflicted, He turned again unto me and said: 
20 Suffer the little children to come unto me, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. 
21 And we did suffer all the parents to gather the little children and bring them to the Lord. And He did teach them many things that cannot be written. And He raised His hands into the air and He blessed all the little ones. Now when He had done this, a great light was seen in the sky above their heads and they were all enveloped in light. And it was to be seen within the light that angels descended and did minister to the children. And voices were heard that we did not understand, and songs were voiced that we did not know. And all the people marveled at this thing. And when the angels had again ascended and the light had gone away, behold, the countenances of the children shone still and they did prophesy. 


CHAPTER 7 
1 Now, after all these things had taken place, Jesus turned once again to me and said: 
2 Behold, the people of Corianton are Nem indeed. Great should be your joy and also your cause to give thanks and rejoice. For, you have listened to my voice and you have sought my face. Wherefore, I have manifested myself unto you at many times, and you are not surprised nor too much amazed by my appearance unto you this day. This thing does please me very much. Now I go unto the Nem of Mentina again to teach them. Continue faithful and I will visit you often to teach you also. 
3 And after He had said this, a cloud did descend from heaven and He was taken up in it and carried away with a great sound. 
4 And I, and all the people, did stand in amazement and in joy. Yea, we felt a joy that could not find expression. And we could not find it in ourselves to depart one from another for the space of many hours because of the Spirit that was in us. For, of a sudden, one person or another would burst forth in prophecy and we were loathe to be absent from such miracles. 
5 Now, in three days time the people had meant to meet to worship together because of the signs that had been shown in the heavens. And now that Jesus had visited them and manifested Himself unto them, they were all the more anxious to meet and offer oblations unto Him. And it was while we were thus met and employed that we looked and behold, Jesus stood in our midst. And when we had seen Him, all the people bowed down to the earth before Him. And He sat with us and taught us upon the bench, saying: 
6 Samuel, you who have been my mouthpiece in times past, be so now even unto this people. And take twelve of your people, of both men and women, and behold, I shall touch them and place upon them the priesthood. And they shall listen to my words and take them to the people. For the multitude gathered is great and my voice shall reach them all through my anointed ones. And all those who are of the Nem of Corianton who are not present must also hear my words. Wherefore, these whom you appoint and upon whom I lay this great charge, shall take other twelve from each city and region, to begin the spreading of my gospel to all the people. 
7 Then, when all the people have received of my word, let them all strive to obtain for themselves the anointing. And if they do this with singleness of heart, seeking my face, behold, I shall manifest myself unto them upon the Way. For I am the Way, the Truth and the Light. If anyone seeks me in this spirit, they shall find me. 
8 And I did all that the Lord commanded me, choosing out six men and six women who were known to me to be upright people with good intentions. And He took them one by one and touched them and called them to be His servants. And these are the words He used: 
9 Upon you, my servant, I lay a certain charge and commission. And I give you authority to act in all things that the Spirit does manifest that I would do were I present to do them. Wherefore, be diligent in study, and also in fasting and in prayer. In this shall you know my doctrine. Yea, in this shall you know of me, through the whisperings of the Spirit, that which is my will and that which is not. And I give unto you power to command the elements as often as the Spirit dictates. Wherefore, pray always that you be not deceived and carried away in pride. 
10 Then, casting His eyes about, He taught us concerning this priesthood, saying: 
11 Behold, I do perceive your thoughts. Marvel not that I have given mine authority to women and men alike. Yea, this thing has been of concern to some since the day that Sabel received word from me of the ordinance she should perform when I came. Behold, I do confer the priesthood upon those men who would follow me and do the things they see me do. And unto such is made an ordination, that they may speak and act in my name, and be justified in so doing. But I do not confer such upon the women, for they have of my Mother in Heaven that which I cannot give. Wherefore, I do ordain them. But the priesthood they have already cannot be given, nor taken away, but by that person who gave it. Wherefore, if there be any woman who desires to follow me and do the things they see me do, they are authorized from the foundation of the world, and I do justify them. 
12 For, the daughters of Eve do sacrifice of themselves freely for the sake of all living. For this cause did Adam call her name Eve. For she is the Mother of all Living. She does give of herself, even to the laying down of her life, in order that man might be, and in order that the purposes of heaven may go forward. She is a Priestess and Queen unto the Most High God forever. 
13 Wherefore, if by the Spirit she is moved upon to take up emblems of my life and death, and bless them, and administer them to the people, what is that to you? She does it unto me. Wherefore, restrain her not at all. 
14 But behold, men received not such power by their creation and come into the world without the natural inclination to do good. Wherefore have I said, the natural man is an enemy to God. By the sweat of his face shall Adam earn his bread all the days of his life. And through constancy in service and in sacrifice shall he learn, order by order, line upon line, even precept on precept, to become like me and do the things they see me do. Wherefore, I confer priesthood upon men who would be my servants, and I give them authority to minister. But women are ministers from the foundation of the world. 
15 And when a man wishes to engage in the work of my Father which is in Heaven, you unto whom I have given this authority may confer it unto him and ordain him to that stewardship that I shall provide for him. That he may also take up his cross and learn by the application of the Law of the Gospel to give freely of himself, breaking his heart and humbling his spirit. For, this is the sacrifice which I will accept of him. Yea, he shall bend his own will and tame it, and do whatsoever I shall command him. And this he shall learn to do without coercion or compulsion, but freely of his own accord. This is the sacrifice of the heart and the spirit which I require of all those who would call themselves my servants. 
16 And that man shall attend to do his duty unto the people, administering the sacraments unto them, keeping my Holy House, and teaching the people. This is the work that I shall require of him. And behold, he shall do all this freely and shall not be compelled to do it in any way. For, though the priesthood appears to be that by which service is rendered unto others, it is a service unto me and unto my Father. Wherefore, let him do it with an eye single to the glory of God and not to his own. And if he do this, he shall attain to that state of happiness of which the prophets have spoken, both in this life as also in the life to come. 
17 And when a woman wishes to engage in the work of my Father which is in Heaven, in addition to that great work which the Mother has given unto her by virtue of her very creation, you, unto whom I have given my authority, may ordain her unto that stewardship that I shall provide for her. And she shall apply that great gift, which my Mother which is in Heaven has given her, to the ministering unto the people as the man does. She shall also bend her own will and do whatsoever I shall command her. But remember, whereas the stewardship that I shall provide for every man is a necessary thing for most men, in order that they might overcome the natural man, that which has been provided women by the Mother does already accomplish this end for them. Wherefore, priesthood, though a woman may officiate in the sacraments and in every holy ordinance, is not requisite for her salvation. Whereas, men must have this device in order to truly come unto me. And where the priesthood is not available for them, surely I shall provide another means whereby men may overcome that which prevents them from the Way. 
18 And these are the sacraments which I command you to administer unto my children: 
19 You shall bless your little ones, calling upon my name. For, in the day that I began the work of atonement for them, they were given to me by the Father and the Mother. Wherefore, ye are my children, notwithstanding, I am also my Father’s son. 
20 And you shall teach them my gospel and my commandments all the days of their youth, that they may not go up into my Holy House unprepared. Indeed, it is a great wrong that is done daily to little children, that they are expected to live by my law without instruction. Wherefore, let all your children be instructed in all the points of my gospel and of every ordinance before they enter into any of them, that their commitments and covenants be made of their own free will and clear understanding. 
21 And when a child reaches that age wherein they begin to understand my gospel, they shall be held accountable for that understanding. Wherefore, you shall take them and cleanse them every whit with water. And this may be done after the manner of Alma when he baptized the people in the Waters of Mormon, or it may be done after the manner of the purification of the Ammonites. For I will accept such baptism or such purification, and sanctify it unto you. And behold, if they do this, accepting this ordinance with understanding, then I shall baptize them with Fire and with the Holy Ghost. 
22 When a youth reaches that age of agency, wherein they may also beget children, let them be taken aside and blessed especially with that which the Spirit instructs. For they will need added guidance from the Spirit at that time. But let not this ordinance be trifled with and let only those of venerable age and experience administer this ordinance unto the people. For, in giving a blessing of guidance upon life experience, the Spirit speaks in language that only one with great experience may discern. Wherefore, let not the young undertake to give such blessings, for they shall be frustrated. 
23 And you shall administer the sacrament of my last supper, as you have seen administered unto me. And when you administer this sacrament, it shall be unto the people as an emblem that they do accept my commandments. And if they do this often and of their own free will, they shall be admitted into that covenant which I made with the Father and the Holy Ghost. Yea, they shall have place in that New and Everlasting Covenant of Heaven. But, if they do not accept my commandments, and strive to keep them, behold, they shall have no part in this covenant, but must return unto that covenant they had before and suffer eternal deaths. Nevertheless, they shall be saved in the end, for God does save all the works of His hands. But they shall not receive the all which God might have given them through this New and Everlasting Covenant, worlds without end, only that which they may receive of and through their own atonement. 
24 And when you bless the bread, take it up and break it. Do not cut the bread, but break it into pieces, for thus did my own people break my body. And when you bless the bread address the Father in my name and beseech Him to bless the bread as food unto your souls. Because it is my body and it was broken by my own. Declare to the Father that you do take upon yourselves my name, for this is the way in which you shall be admitted into Our covenant. Do this, that you may receive of me my spirit, that you may think and act as you see me think and act. 
25 And when you bless the wine, take it up in the vessel and pour it out into the chalice. For, the blood of my body did flow out of every pore when I did make an atonement for you. As also the blood and water of my body did flow out when I was lifted up on the cross. Wherefore, administer not the wine in the vessel but pour it out into the chalice. 
26 And when you take up the chalice, address the Father in my name and beseech Him to bless the wine as drink unto your souls. Declare unto the Father that you do verily take upon you my name and accept my portion of the covenant which I made with Him and also the Holy Ghost. Do this and you shall surely have my spirit to be with you, for you shall have taken upon yourselves that which I took upon myself by the power of the Holy Ghost. 
27 And when a man and a woman wish to be joined together, you shall do it in my name by that authority which I have given you. And let it be done in a solemn and holy manner, in a place made sacred. And let not any man or woman bind themselves together in my name, except they have individually gone up to my Holy House and received of me there the ordinances of the High Place. Then, having understanding, let them make covenants unto each other. Yea, they shall not make eternal covenants unto each other until they have made them unto their God. Then let them be sealed together in my name. 
28 And when they have received of the ordinances of the High Place, yea, the ordinances of my Holy House, then they shall administer unto each other the ordinance of the washing of the feet, which you have seen administered unto me in a manner most holy. Yea, the woman shall wash and anoint the feet, the hands and the crown of the head of her husband. And the man shall also do likewise unto his wife. Then shall they wear the robes of the priesthood together. Then shall they become Kings and Queens, Priests and Priestesses unto the Lord God forever. But until they do this, they shall be priests and priestesses and servants, but shall have no sovereignty. Wherefore, let them make this covenant together, that they may receive all that my Father has, worlds without end. 
29 And if they do this, receiving the ordinances and principles of the High Place, then shall the Holy Spirit of Promise seal them up unto me and I shall make of their covenant even an eternal covenant. And behold, though heaven and earth pass away, their covenant shall remain in full force and they shall be added upon in the eternities of heaven, even worlds without end. 
30 But behold, this is not all. Let those who have received my commission direct the teaching of my gospel. Yea, feed my sheep. And when my little ones have received all my word, then shall they be prepared to make covenants in the High Place. Let not anyone go up to my Holy House that has not learned my word and applied my doctrine. 
31 In your homes also ought you to learn and study my word. Yea, search the scriptures and find application of them in your daily walk. Do not as the priests of the Jews nor of the Nephites. For, many of them did set to memory my words and elaborate them in speech most pleasing. But behold, they did not find place in their hearts to exercise my word. It is not enough to sit at the feet of the prophets and hear my law. If you would please me, and my Father which is in Heaven, you must be doers of the word, not hearers only. 
32 And behold, if you do this, hungering and thirsting after righteousness, my word shall become a feast unto you, and you shall be filled, even to the overflowing of the cup. And the Holy Ghost shall be unto you as a constant companion. Wherefore, you cannot be deceived. Nay, even should some evil overtake this seat, you shall not be gainsaid because my word has filled your souls. And I say unto you, even if the prophets become as sounding brass, and even should my very elect become lost in a sea of confusion, yet shall you be filled with my Spirit and you shall see clearly by the power of the Holy Ghost. 


CHAPTER 8 
1 Now, Jesus did lay hands on the sick and they were healed. And He did lay His hands on the disconsolate and they were comforted. And He taught us words of peace and the ordinances of the gospel and our minds were enlightened and our spirits were quickened. But behold, the tenth part, nay, even the hundredth part of what He taught could not be contained in the books. Wherefore, all you who would know of the things which he taught, make yourselves clean, obtain the ordinances whereby you may learn the Law of the Gospel, and having taken upon yourselves His name, He shall baptize you with Fire and with the Holy Ghost. Then may your election be made sure and plain, and you shall find place upon that Way which does open up to the righteous, and you shall be elevated to the place wherein you may receive of His word from angels and even from His own mouth. 
2 For, when Jesus sat upon the high seat, behold, we looked up into heaven and saw angels. And even we did speak with them and they did minister to us. And we went into a place of peace, a place of holiness, a place of beauty, a place of stillness, a place of perfection, a place of God. And we did see all things more clearly. And the eyes of our spirits were opened. And the ears of our spirits were unstopped. And our tongues did speak with the words put into us by the Holy Ghost. 
3 Behold, this is the thing most desirable to us – that we might be so instructed in all of the things the Lord would have us do. 
4 Now, I continue with the words of Jesus. For, in some things He did teach us with great plainness and He also did command that I should write those things that would have some particular value unto they who might read this record in times of futurity. Yea, He did command that His prophecy be written and preserved for those of our descendents who might be led to find these writings and ponder them in their hearts. And He did prophesy unto us, saying: 
5 In the end of days, when all these my words have been corrupted, I shall bring about a great work. Yea, your descendents will remain faithful for many generations and they shall walk in my paths avoiding the pitfalls that are placed before them by the evil one. Be not dismayed that your descendents shall fall into corruption, for even in their darkest times, they shall preserve much light and much that is righteousness in me. And from out of your descendents shall I raise up a race of prophets, such as the world has never known, and they shall bring again Zion. 
6 But behold, it is wisdom in that the words of truth that I have spoken unto all the people of this fair land should come again into all the world. And I have chosen one race to do it. But that race shall have been dispersed into all the world and so great will be their drive to survive in any circumstance that they, having received a portion of my word, shall take it into all the world with great vigor. 
7 Notwithstanding they shall be mighty in spreading that portion of my word in all the world, this same drive will make them greedy in the obtaining of property and riches. This thing shall corrupt even my servants in the last days. And this pride shall insinuate itself into even my doctrine and my gospel in those perilous days. Nevertheless, because of their great ambition and their great drive to survive, I shall use them for my purposes, and I shall commence a restoration of all my words through them. 
8 But, now I do warn you and forewarn you, pride does cause my spirit to withdraw, yea, and even the Holy Ghost finds it difficult to move upon the heart of one who is puffed up with it. And this shall be a great vice among the men of my Church in the last days. Yea, they shall take of that portion of my authority which I shall give unto them, and they shall grasp it unto their bosoms. And, claiming that it is all the priesthood, they shall corrupt it. And even that portion of my authority which I shall share with them, line upon line, they shall make corruption of it and use it to compulsion. And in that day, when any of my daughters shall act in any righteous way by virtue of that authority or priesthood which they have received, the men shall persecute them for it. Yea, they shall not understand the nature of my authority and priesthood, and they shall use it to divide my saints. In that day, even mine own elect shall be deceived, for they shall become a great stumbling block to righteousness. 
9 Behold, I gave unto some prophets, and unto some I gave apostles, and still unto others I gave evangelists, and teachers. In all generations of time, have I given unto the Saints that measure of authority necessary for them to fulfill my design. Yea, I gave unto them that priesthood necessary for them to preach my word, to build my Church and to redeem the living and the dead. 
10 But behold, because the Gentiles shall have languished long in a dearth of my spirit, when a restoration of my gospel is delivered unto them, they altogether revel in that restoration. And ere they have received all, they shall become puffed up. And they shall immediately begin to divide my Church, and to cut it up into pieces. Yea, the men shall be divided from the women, and the children from their parents. Yea, and even they shall make division in the ministry, the young divided from the old. And with division comes great confusion. For a house divided against itself cannot stand. 
11 Wherefore, write this prophecy in a book and preserve it. And in the day of great tribulation, when even my own appointed prophets shall sit in confusion, I shall cause my words to come forth from the dust. Yea, out of the earth shall my words hiss, and though they make every attempt to cover them up again, yet shall my words be made known and their folly shall be uncovered. Behold, they who do still see with the eyes of the spirit shall read these records, and of this prophecy most especially, and they shall beseech me again, seeking my face. And when they do this, I shall show myself unto them with great power. Then shall the restoration proceed again unhindered by pride. 
12 And I shall call again that apostle whom I loved from old, and he shall come forth again and make a regulation of my Church. And behold, there are three of my apostles whom I have called from among the people of the Land Bountiful unto whom I have given power over death. They also shall I call up and send unto the righteous remnant from within my house. And these, being directed by my beloved apostle, shall make a great regulation and shall put in order my Holy House. And behold, all who read this record, as well the other works that I shall cause to be written and hid up in the earth until a certain time, shall see clearly how that by my spirit I did direct the people of this day in their sacred walk and their sacred talk. Yea, and they who read these things shall see that John and his fellow servants shall order my house in the way in which I have instructed you by my spirit. 
13 Then shall the saints once again approach me without persecution. Then the very elect shall no longer be deceived. Then shall my prophets sit no longer in stupor or in idleness of thought. But their building and their teaching shall once again be for the profit of both living and dead. Then shall my people turn again from their pride and their riches and embrace their God. 
14 And this shall be a sign unto you, Oh house of Israel – in the day when the holy incense is taken away from the ordinances of my Holy House, yea, and in the day when the dead sacrifice shall have been restored but shall have taken precedence over the living, yea, in the day when those whom I shall call to stretch forth the hand to steady the ark shall teach my children to follow their words and their doctrine, and not to seek the Spirit in all things, yea, in the day when the place of my daughters shall have been reduced to a place of compulsion and servitude unto the men, then shall the time be ripe for the fulfillment of my words. Yea, then shall I call forth my servants to do my will and regulate my Church. Then shall all things be brought again in order and my saints shall begin again to bring about Zion in this fair land. 
15 But behold, I would not that you judge the people of that time. For remember that it is for a good purpose in me that I shall give unto the Gentiles my gospel for a season. And it is for a good purpose in me that they shall spread a portion of my word unto this people into all the world. Wherefore, because they do stumble and ere, do not judge them. For great is their portion of the work, and I shall bring them unto a remembrance of my will. And in the day that they do hear again my voice from out of the earth, then shall I show myself unto them again from Heaven. 
16 And in that day shall the people be one. Yea, and they shall have all things in common, even as you have. And they shall call up their councils and the solemn assemblies in spirit, and my spirit shall guide them in all that they do. And every saint shall sit at the feet of the prophets and hear words of counsel and of peace. But they shall also come unto me upon the Way and see my face, and I shall instruct them. And in that day even these things shall not be enough for my people. For, even seeing my face, they shall submit all things to the confirmation of the Holy Ghost. And they shall surely be sealed unto me by the power of the Holy Ghost, who is the Holy Spirit of Promise. 
17 Now, I command you, Samuel, my servant, write these things in a book, even a book of remembrance unto your own posterity. For I shall cause them to whisper forth from the earth into their ears. And behold, they shall come forth from them and because of them, and for their benefit in the last days. Behold, I have spoken it, and I excuse not myself. Amen. 


CHAPTER 9 
1 Now, when Jesus had spoken these words, He retired from the multitude and took with Him those whom He commanded that I should call out from among the people to be His servants. And He did instruct us more fully in doctrine and in practice. And these things are written more plainly in the Book of the High Place. Wherefore, I shall not repeat them here. For behold, our method of writing, though it be not so cumbersome as that employed by our brethren in the Land Southward, it does, nevertheless take much metal, and metal is scarce here in the Land Northward. Wherefore, I shall not take up my stylus and write all the words which He did teach unto us privily. 
2 But behold, I would exhort you of my posterity that might be guided by the spirit unto the finding of these records – give heed to the words of the Savior. For He did surely prophecy of your day and your doing. Be diligent in seeking the guidance of the Holy Ghost. For through you shall the Lord do a great and mighty work. 
3 And now I proceed with my own account of the visit of the Christ unto the Nem of Corianton. 
4 For behold, Jesus did spend many days with us in our city, and He did praise in those things wherein we had followed His spirit, and He did chasten us in those things wherein we did follow our own counsel. 
5 And after He had taught us in every needful thing, He once again caused that I should call all the people together to hear Him. And behold, a greater multitude did gather in the city. And He did rise before the multitude and did stretch forth His hands unto them and cried unto them, saying; 
6 Blessed are you, Nem. For, you do follow the promptings of the Holy Ghost in all your doings. And blessed shall you ever be, so long as you do this. For, how can you err, seeing that you are led continually by the Spirit. Wherefore, continue in this and you shall always have peace. 
7 Be merciful, be benevolent, seek not riches, but heap to yourselves treasures in heaven. Seek not to have dominion over others, but be filled with love and charity toward all people. Do not look upon yourselves as more fair, or more blessed than your neighbor, but seek always for your neighbor’s good. Lift up the hands that hang down, and comfort the widow and the fatherless, for this is true religion. Yea, love your neighbor as your own self. In other words, see your neighbor as he really is in relation to yourselves. For which of your neighbors is made of different stuff than I did make of you? Are you not all relations? Wherefore, love your neighbor as yourself in all things and it will be well both for you and your neighbor alike. 
8 Do not judge one another but in righteousness. And when you judge one another, let it be in love and in a sacred manner, looking only for the benefit and profit of him whom you must judge. And when you judge, see to it that he whom you have judged is edified. In this shall you edify yourselves also. 
9 But seek not judgment unto yourselves for worthiness. Go not unto your leaders to seek judgment of them. Come unto me and you shall be justified, for, there is not one among you, nor even among they unto whom I have given authority in any measure, who is mighty to save. Wherefore, how may they judge your worthiness? Declare unto me your intentions and seek me in all humility. This is judgment enough. For, if you seek my face, I shall not forsake you. And if, finding me upon the Way, how may any judge your intentions? For behold, I am the Way. Any who go into that holy place is justified in me. 
10 Behold, you whom I call to be my servants and unto whom I do give a portion of my authority, do not contrive to think to ascribe unto yourselves that measure of perfection necessary to make judgment of the worthiness of another. You may, by my authority judge actions or works, but never the man or the woman. I am He unto whom the Father has given all judgment. Wherefore, I give unto some the power to judge the works of men, but never the power to judge the man. Keep this saying in your hearts and you will do well. 
11 For, anything more than this comes of evil. Yea, anything more than this is compulsion. Behold, I will at times compel my saints to be humble, but you have not this right, nor this power. In the moment you take it up, you do sell your people into slavery. 
12 Now listen to my voice all you who would call yourselves mine, Zion cannot be established in any form of slavery. Yea, and when men do seek to compel, or in other words enslave, their fellowman, I am grieved in the Spirit. Yea, and the Holy Ghost withdraws. And when the Holy Ghost withdraws, the heavens are sealed. In this darkened state, you cannot seek my face nor be instructed of me. Wherefore, you must turn unto your leaders to determine your worthiness. But howbeit if your leaders are also in this state of darkness? How may you be justified? 
13 Wherefore, seek not to place yourselves higher than your neighbor. And if your calling seem to give you power over your neighbor, then behold, you have not understood your calling. And if your occupation seems to enlarge your station over that of your neighbor, behold, let this be a sign unto you that you have fallen into pride, not understanding the abundance wherewith I do bless the saints, nor the purpose for which I have so blessed you. Take of your abundance and enlarge the station and condition of your neighbor. Then shall you establish Zion in your own heart, and I shall surely reward you abundantly in my kingdom. 
14 And behold, if any people come up into your land and try to overcome the peace by evil means, take the matter up in your councils. And if the Holy Ghost constrains you to defend yourselves so as to preserve the peace of the land, then you shall take up your sword and defend yourselves. But you shall only do this after you have sued unto them for peace. For how know you that they do act as they do only out of ignorance of the gospel of peace. 
15 Wherefore, you shall do as my servants in Mentina have done. First preach my word unto your enemies. And if they embrace not my gospel, then pray for them and sue for peace. If they give peace, then you shall live peaceably with them. But if they reject my gospel and also to live in peace, and the Holy Ghost constrain you, you shall take up your sword and drive them from your land. 
16 But behold, you shall never take up your sword to destroy your enemy. For, howbeit he may some day repent. Or it may be that his children may repent. And how can you know the hearts of men? Wherefore, if you take up your sword to destroy your enemy, you may take away from me many who might some day be my own. Do not become my enemy! 
17 I see into the hearts of men. Yea, all things lay open before me. And behold, if I deem it necessary to destroy a people, I shall do it! But you can never have this power, for you know not the end from the beginning. Wherefore, I say again unto you, even should the Holy Ghost move you to war, seek not the destruction of your enemy. And when you have prevailed, and it becomes obvious that you shall prevail, cease the work of death and sue for peace. Yea, and take unto yourselves all those who would make peace with you, even if they have come unto you to make war in the first place. 
18 And behold, if your neighbor makes war upon you and you are constrained by the Spirit to defend yourselves, and you do not prevail, sue speedily for peace. Even if you become enslaved, you shall be more able to move the hearts of your enemies to the love of God if you are living. But if you are destroyed, how may God use you as an instrument for the conversion of your enemy? In all things seek the guidance of the Spirit and seek not to move the nations of men. For you know not the ways of God, nor His great plan for the nations of men. Wherefore, be a good neighbor to all men and be led by the Spirit in all things. 
19 Now, I go unto all the people left in the land to preach unto them also my gospel and to establish Zion among them. And behold, the face of this fair land shall be covered with the righteous for many generations. Wherefore, make friends of all those who would come unto you in this good time and rejoice in the righteousness of the Lord. For they also shall have all things in common and shall work righteousness. Wherefore, be not too isolated from the nations that I shall raise up among the people of this land. 
20 Walk righteously and follow me. Seek always the good of others and serve them. Love one another. Sustain and support each other. See to my work and hold to that truth which I have given you through the scriptures, the words of my anointed and through the gifts of the Holy Ghost. Most of all, my little flock, come unto me. Seek my face. Seek and you shall find me. Ask and you shall receive abundantly all that I see that you are in need of. Knock and I shall open the Way unto you. Amen. 
21 Now, when Jesus had said these words, behold, He was surrounded with a pillar of light and of smoke, and He was taken up from among us. And the heavens resounded with great songs of praise as it were from a great multitude of angels singing together. And many who heard them raised their voices also and joined the throng. And others clapped their hands together for joy. And so great was the sound that our hearts continued filled with it for many days. 
22 And so filled were our hearts with the things the Lord had taught us that we did have to screw ourselves up even to do the necessary things to make our livings. For, we were filled to brimming with the great and marvelous thing that had taken place. For, even though Jesus was taken up into heaven and we saw not His Person among us, we were filled with the Holy Ghost and we did seek the Lord upon that Way which He had provided for us. And behold, it was unto us as if He had not left us. 


CHAPTER 10 
1 Now, the words of the Savior made a great impact upon me. For behold, I have lived according to His words all the days of my life. And He did call me from time to time by His spirit which is in me to go unto the people and teach His word unto them. And even I did go by His command unto my brethren in the Land Southward to prophecy against them and also to give the signs of His coming into the world. Wherefore, I have not been ignorant of His teachings. 
2 Nevertheless, oft times all men become somewhat prideful in the things they think they know. And I did on occasion believe that I did know more about the things of the Lord than did my fellow man. And I was carried away in my pride insomuch that I believe that I did omit to secure the confirmation of the Holy Ghost in connection with many things. Yea, I have been remiss a very many times throughout my life because of the pride of my heart. 
3 And the words the Lord spoke unto my people were all the more sharp for me because I was able to see myself in the light of everything He said unto us. And my whole frame shudders at the thought that I might have been the means whereby some poor soul has rejected the words of peace because of my pride and high mindedness. 
4 Wherefore, the Spirit does move upon me to add somewhat upon this subject ere I give up this life. Howbeit, there may be some of my posterity who are like unto me in this respect. And it seems wise and expedient to me that I do it in the form of a song unto my own forefathers. Yea, I shall sing a song of Corianton and Isabel because their history bespeaks of pride and of the suffering that can come of it in the lives of men and women. 
5 Now, Corianton was my grandfather and he did leave the land of his birth and of his inheritance because of pride and of error. For, he was the son of a prophet of God, and he might have been the High Priest of Zarahemla had he remained in the land of his birth. But, because of a great wrong done unto him, born of pride and of error, he did take his sojourn into the wilderness of the north, never to return or to be seen again in the Land Southward. 
6 This same Corianton, when he was a young man, was sent by the prophet, his father, even that Alma of which much is written, to preach the gospel unto the Lamanites in the Land of Nephi and also unto the Zoramites, whose city lay between the Land of Zarahemla and the Land of Nephi. And he was obedient to the will of the Lord given him through his father, the prophet. 
7 Wherefore, he went with his brethren into the land of the Lamanites to preach unto them, and the mission was exceedingly hard for the youth. But he and his brethren, though they had many trials along the way, yea, for many of the Lamanites beat them and cast stones at them, yea, and many times the Lamanites sought to take away their lives; they did also enjoy the fruits of their labors, for some there were that believed on their words and embraced the truth, repenting of all their wickedness. 
8 Now, one of those who heard the sons of Alma and repented was a harlot whose name was Isabel. And she lived close unto the Lamanites and also unto the Nephites, for she lived in the borders between the two people. And she was known both unto the Lamanites and also the Nephites as the harlot Isabel. 
9 But behold, she did repent and was an harlot no more. Yea, from the day that the sons of Alma came unto her door to preach the gospel unto her, she gave up her profession and vowed to serve the Lord all the days of her life. And from that day also, she cast out the harlots from her house and cleaned it every whit. And the doors of the house she kept open for the aid of travelers and for the comfort of the needy, and she began to do a great work. 
10 But she was still known throughout all the land as the harlot Isabel, and the greater portion of the people knew not of her good works, but only remembered her for her wickedness in the days prior to her repentance. 
11 But behold, Corianton and the other sons of Alma came often to her home and she did minister to them. For they were often downtrodden and heavy with the work. And on other occasions they were wounded or sick, and she cared for them. And Corianton saw her kindness and her charity to the needy and he secretly loved her for her good works. And he was often seen in the vicinity of her house preaching to her neighbors in the cities round about the borders of the land. 
12 Now, it came to pass that a certain merchant, whose name was Saneth, and he was a wicked Nephite, came to the house of Isabel to demand of her by way of her former occupation. And when he discovered that she had repented and was no longer an harlot, he was wroth with her and he beat her with a rod. But she would not consent to minister unto him the wickedness that was in his heart because of the vow she had made unto the Lord. And she suffered herself to be beaten with a sore violence. 
13 And this same Saneth went his way, even unto the city of Zarahemla, and finding Alma, he did recount to him that he had seen his son Corianton consorting with the Harlot Isabel. And this thing troubled Alma greatly. And he did make inquiries as to the state of this Isabel and whether she was in truth an harlot. And behold, all the people of the land round about the border between the lands of the Nephites and the lands of the Lamanites did report that she was indeed an harlot. And Alma did believe the report of the people. 
14 And when he was satisfied that the report was true, he summoned his son Corianton to return from his mission. And when he had returned from his mission and did present himself before his father, his father did chasten him greatly for his folly with the harlot Isabel and did straitly accuse him of approaching nigh even unto that sin which the Lord hates, even the sin of fornication. And this he did because of the rumor that had reached him from the people round about where Corianton had preached. 
15 Now, Corianton did esteem his father to be the prophet of God. Wherefore, he did not correct his father, nor give any account of his doings. Rather, he humbly received the rebuke and chastening of his father with sorrow in his heart. 
16 And Alma believed that Corianton held his tongue out of a knowledge of his guilt. Wherefore, he felt justified in harshly chastening his son. 
17 And it came to pass that Corianton made preparations for Isabel, that she might come into the Land of Zarahemla where he thought she might find safety. And he made preparations that an agent of his own property might be empowered to make employment of his own substance to provide for her. And he did return again to preach the gospel unto the Zoramites. And again the mission was difficult but Alma and his brethren made good their mission and returned unto their own land. And the record of their efforts is given in another place. 
18 But behold, when Corianton returned unto his own property, he found that his agent had failed to provide for the woman Isabel and that she was not found in the place he had provided for her. And when he made inquiries as to where she had gone, he was told that she had departed from his house and had taken up her own residence. 
19 And when he came to the place where she had made her own residence, Corianton found her making her living by weaving mats and baskets. And behold, her workmanship was exceedingly fine. But, notwithstanding the workmanship of her hands was of the finest in the land, her circumstances were exceedingly poor because the Nephites did persecute her because she had been a harlot. 
20 And this was because the rumor had gone out from Zarahemla of the sharp words of Alma, the prophet, spoken unto Corianton when he first returned from the mission whereunto he had been sent. Yea, Alma’s words were spoken out of the pride of his heart. For, he was wroth that a son of his might commit the great sin while in the service of the Lord. 
21 Yet, Corianton sinned not at all and there is proof of it in his returning to preach unto the Zoramites over against the land of Nephi. Nevertheless, lest his descendents judge Alma too much, it was also pride in the heart of Corianton that prevented him from speaking out the truth unto his father. For, he knew that Alma was the prophet of God, and it was his belief that his father should have known of the Spirit what was true and what was not. 
22 For, how could he not know that his son was innocent of the sin with which the wicked did accuse him? Did he not take the matter to the Lord? And did the Spirit not whisper words of peace unto his soul? We know that he did, for he sent Corianton back into the service of the Lord. Yet, he could not take back the words he had spoken publicly, words which the people took to be spoken by the spirit of truth in him. Then did a people magnify the severity of the matter and they did not seek confirmation of it through the Holy Ghost. 
23 And in this thing did the Lord teach us all a great lesson. It is true that the Lord does call out prophets from among the people. But, let not any people begin in the belief that the calling out makes a man not a man. The prophet of God is given great gifts of the Spirit. Yea, he may speak with the tongues of angels and with them, and, if he has the gift of the seer, he may translate strange languages. And behold, the prophet leads and guides the people in the will and work of the Lord also. But, know this all you who read these things and ponder them in your hearts, the prophet is fallible. He is not perfect, and his counsels are not perfect. And, though we count ourselves blessed because the Lord does see fit to call and raise up unto us His prophets, it is because He does this that we feel constrained to subject all things unto the confirmation of the Holy Ghost, howbeit even the words of a prophet. 
24 Behold, the Lord has spoken it: Thou shalt have no other Gods before me. Wherefore, make not gods of your prophets! For they will be false gods and idols. For, even if they be called of God and appointed, yea, even if they be anointed by the very finger of God, they are yet simple men and you will have made unto yourselves gods that shall fall. For there are but few men unto whom the Lord has given power over death, and they are John his beloved apostle, and Nephi, Lehi, and Timothy, who were brothers and among the twelve He chose when He came to the people gathered about the temple in the Land Bountiful. But all others shall fall by the shaft of death, just as you and I must likewise fall. And when we fall, our bodies shall go back into the earth, as with all living things. And, notwithstanding our spirits live on, in accordance with that great covenant and plan by which this world was created, yet are we corruptible, and yet does the idol rust and the rot take us. Wherefore, when you make gods of the servants of God, you cast their ashes in His face. Will he hold you sinless in this? 
25 I say unto you, He will hold you accountable. For, has He not commanded each of us to pray always? And does this not also apply to every word that has proceeded out of the mouths of the prophets? For, I ask you, how know you that I ever lived? Now, I write this unto my own descendents. Wherefore, I desire that you have a remembrance of me and of my doing. But, how know you that these writings truly come to you from me, my children? No man may confirm it. It is only by the confirmation of the Holy Ghost that you may know that I truly wrote these things unto you. And behold, it is by that power which the Holy Ghost possesses that you may have all knowledge, for, it is by that power that the Christ did take upon Himself all things. And it is by that same power that He may give the same to us. Yea, it is by that power that all things may be brought to our remembrance, both those things which we sometime knew of our own conscience and experience, as well as all things known because of the experiences of others. Yea, even all that the Father has may be given to us by this same power. 
26 Wherefore, why seek we to make all things sure by the voice and word of men? There is but one way to know of a surety that a thing is true, whether spoken by a man or men, or by a prophet, or by an angel, or even by the very voice of Christ Himself! Yea, I make so bold as to say that I would gladly speak face to face with God, and hold myself blessed in every way. But behold, having thus communed in a most holy way, I would retire to my chamber, and bend my knee and my will, and ask most humbly that the Holy Ghost might confirm the thing unto my soul. 
27 Does this sound ill? To some it may speak of doubt. But, I shall importune the Lord in this thing, for He has commanded it. And I would rather He be importuned than that His anger be kindled against me. 
28 Yea, for behold, even the elect shall be deceived. Even the prophets of God may act and speak betimes as men and fathers sometimes do out of the earthy and carnal concerns of their hearts. Yea, what man does not feel strongly the needs and responsibilities of his stewardship? Do not expect them to be any different than yourselves, and, if the Lord does allow men to be fallible and to err, but to repent, so much more ought you to allow the same. Wherefore, the Lord has counseled us: Judge not. For with that same judgment wherewith thou judgest, thou shalt also be judged. 
29 Behold, I say unto you who shall receive these things and ponder them, You shall live in a time when men do seek to elevate the prophets unto that status wherein they may speak no error nor act in any mean thing. This is a great pitfall to the righteous. For, such men shall make regulations that begin to deny the right of every son or daughter of God to seek the confirmation of the Holy Ghost. Yea, in your day, if a man hears the words of some prophet and, seeking the confirmation of the Holy Ghost, fails to receive it, but receives instead a witness that the utterance is false or misguided, behold, he shall be brought up before the counsels and he shall be persecuted for having received such a witness. And they shall scourge him bitterly with their words and shall even cast him out from among them. 
30 Look you to your own day! For speedy destruction of all that you hold dear shall surely come to pass. For, of such pride generally were the Nephites in the Land Southward, and they did persecute and even put to death they who believed the signs of the coming of the Lord. And I ask you, how did they know that the Lord would indeed come? Yea, how did Nephi know? Behold, he heard the voice of God, by the power of that same Holy Ghost! Yea, and the voice said unto him: On the morrow come I into the world. Did he not seek confirmation of that voice? I say unto you, Yea! And when the people brought the believers together to be killed, Nephi did look up to the heavens with full confidence of heart that the Lord would surely come. 
31 And behold, we know that He did come to the people in the Land Southward. For we also have seen Him and can testify of Him. And even He did tell us of His visit unto our brethren in the Land Southward. And of that same Nephi whose faith and confidence was so abundantly rewarded, we know much, for he has been among us and we have heard of his own voice of the great revelations he has received. Yea, of this all our people do testify. But I would not have you believe our words. Nay, believe not the words written in this book if the Holy Ghost does not confirm them unto you. Yea, though my people do call me prophet, and they do revere me and follow my counsels, I would not have them do so but that they be moved upon by the Holy Ghost to do so. 
32 Wherefore, you also may call me prophet, and my words may touch your souls. Nevertheless, make not of me a lesser god, but seek the confirmation of the Holy Ghost in all things. 
CHAPTER 11 
1 And now I return to my song of Corianton and Isabel. 
2 Now, when Corianton returned unto Zarahemla, he found not that Isabel for whom he had previously left a stewardship of his own substance. For, so strait had been the persecution of her by the people that she had departed from out of the city and taken up a household of her own. 
3 Now, this was done without the knowledge of Alma, nor did he know of her existence in Zarahemla, for Corianton had not communicated unto his father his plans for her support. And behold, even had Alma truly believed the rumors voiced about her, he would not have conscienced her persecution. For, though he had the pride of a father, yet had he charity. 
4 But Corianton searched for her and found her. And behold, he found her in low circumstances. Yea, so low were her circumstances that, had Corianton not come back from the field of his service when he did, she would surely have died from want of the necessities of life. And, finding her thus, Corianton was wroth with his father, and also with the people of Zarahemla, and he took her speedily out of the land. Yea, he did take with him only her and a few belongings and they did depart into the Land Northward. 
5 Now, we know that Corianton and Isabel came into the Land Northward, even unto the place where this record is written, and they did unite the scattered people and build a city and a nation. And great has been their success, for we are daily proof of their doings. But Corianton mourned all the days of his life for the great loss he felt when he returned from the service of the Lord and found in his own country a wickedness greater than that which drove him into foreign lands and cities. Yea, he never again communicated with his father. 
6 But behold, Alma knew not of their success, for he heard not a word of them from the day they left into the Land Northward. And so bitter was his sorrow upon discovering the cause of their hasty flight into the wilderness, that his heart was broken. Wherefore, Alma gave up the seat of the High Priest, delivering up the records, and departed also into the wilderness. Now, he did not go into the wilderness to find his son, but rather, believing that his words had driven them out of the land, alone and unprepared, he knew in his heart that he had sent them to their deaths. Wherefore, he took not any provision at all, nay, not even an extra cloak, and he went barefooted into the wilderness and was not seen again. 
7 And some rumor has been voiced about, because of the strangeness of the circumstances surrounding his departure – that he was taken up unto the Lord as was Moses. But we know of no such thing. For, there are three from among the Nephites who were translated, and they are often with us still. Yet, they make no report of Alma or his doing. Wherefore, it is my belief that so great was his grieving, that he went into the wilderness to make peace with his God. And I believe he gave up the ghost there. 
8 For, God does preserve the life of man when He needs him to work in His vineyard. Yea, know this, if you would live long, make yourself indispensable to the Lord. For, He will preserve your life by the power of His outstretched hand. Yea, by that same power whereby He put forth His hand and made heaven and earth, He will prolong your life. And, if it so be that your desire be continually worthy, and you ask Him it with the kind of faith that the Three Nephite Disciples did, then shall He give unto you a portion of that same power, even power over death. But it is a terrible thing! Wherefore, be patient in all that whereunto the Lord does call you, even to labor and be diligent. But, unless you are strong in heart and can withstand much heartache, ask not that thing of the Lord. Perchance, you might receive of Him even according to your desire, not knowing what you ask of Him. 
9 For, unto some He has given that they shall tarry until He comes. Yea, and they taste not of death as we do. But behold, these few, who are like unto Enoch of old, and Moses, and His beloved apostle John, do labor yet in His vineyard. And we have record of their doing, either here or in the other worlds of the Lord’s creation. Yea, they are laboring still, preparing the hearts of the children of God, and also establishing Zion in all those places wherein God’s word is believed. 
10 But they cannot live as you and I live. Nay, they cannot marry and have peace. For, if they do take wife or husband, they shall watch them wither and die, while they change not. And they do not beget children, for their bodies are changed so that they are barren until their work for the Lord shall be completed. And consider how hard their lot would be if they were not barren. Behold, they would also watch their children wither and die, yet they change not at all. And they would be young and see their children age, and weaken, and die. Peace is not given unto them, only that peace which comes of the Lord, for they do daily converse with Him upon the Way. 
11 But as for Alma, we know nothing. Wherefore, it is my belief that he went into the wilderness out of grieving and died there of a broken heart. 
12 Now, think upon these things and ponder them in your hearts. For, would it not have been better for Alma had he sought to discern the truth of the matter of Corianton and Isabel? Yea, I do not sit in judgment of my ancestor, but I do ask the question. Was he not a great and inspired man? Yea, and his counsels for his nation were right and just, and guided by God. Would it not have been better to seek the Holy Ghost in the matter of his son? 
13 And would it not have been different for Corianton and Isabel had Corianton not stayed his tongue? For, though he knew more concerning the matter than his father appeared to, and esteeming his prophet above even the loving reproach of a son, he did not speak the truth to him, a truth that might have prevented much hardship and heartache. For, I believe that, having the word of his son, and a servant of God, over the rumoring tongue of a disappointed merchant, he would have sought the guidance of the Spirit in the matter. 
14 Wherefore, you fathers of sons, take this history of this great prophet of God and apply it to your own lives. Judge not your children by the rumors of men. Nay, judge not even by the thoughts of your own hearts. Be guided by the Spirit in all your doings with your children. For, are they not the children of God also? And if you offend His little ones, verily I say unto you, You shall also offend Him. And behold, who shall offend the Lord? 
15 And I speak unto you who are sons of fathers. Judge not your fathers by the wishes of your own hearts, but be guided by the Spirit in all your doings with your fathers. 
16 And I speak also to you who are called of God to be prophets unto your people. Judge not the people by your own understanding. For, it is as the arm of the flesh, weak and uncertain. Nay, judge not at all but give counsel by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost. For, if you do not, yea, if you follow the dictates of your conscience over the promptings of the Holy Ghost, you set yourself above even the Lord of Creation. For it is by the power of the Holy Ghost that He did make an atonement for you. Wherefore, do not think yourself gods because your people demand that you be so. 
17 And behold, I speak also unto all the people who would call themselves saints. Do not require godhood of your leaders, but godliness. For, it is not sin to require that your prophet be virtuous. Yea, if a prophet be virtuous, then you may with confidence pass over petty faults and differences. But, if you make of them gods to be worshiped, you do commit sin in the eyes of God. For, He shall crush all your idols into sand in the day you bow down to worship them. And if you worship, or in other words, if you esteem your prophets over the gifts of the Spirit, God shall do the same unto them as He did unto the idols of old. Yea, He shall crush them with the might of His Word, and with a two-edged sword. Yea, your idols shall fall, and great shall be the sound of their destruction. For they are but men and shall fall by the shaft, even as I do, even as you do. 
18 Wherefore, sin not. Honor your prophets, and all those whom God does see fit to call out to your service. Sit you down at their feet and hear the words of God and of angels. But bow not down to them. And when a man or woman shall raise themselves up before you and shall call themselves infallible, either by their callings or by their own strength, forsake them quickly! Give that person no reason to stand above you. Seek instead the Spirit. Yea, be guided by God on high by the power of the Holy Ghost, by that unspeakable gift of revelation. Yea, come upon the Way and sit at the feet of prophets, apostles, angels and God Himself. Bow not down to any feeble, unworthy, and fallible human being. 


CHAPTER 12 
1 Now behold, I am old and I go the way of the world. And all the doings of my people I have written in books also. And they shall also come down unto you in the due time of the Lord. Be grateful, my children, for the blessing the Lord has seen fit to bestow upon you. Do not judge the Lord your God. Wait upon His pleasure and do His will in all things, and all will be as well with you as it has been for me and for all the Nem of Corianton. Pray for the day when your God shall open all the books before you and read from them in the high places and on the high days. For in that day shall there be peace finally in all the land of your grandfathers. 
2 Behold, I leave this earth and go to my grandfathers. And I am exceedingly blessed, for, I have walked with them upon the Way since the days of my youth. Wherefore, it shall not be much different when I walk with them continually upon the Way than when I did visit with them during the days of my mortality. 
3 But behold, I do leave this one last prophecy unto you my own descendents. For I was once called Samuel the Lamanite, a prophet called to preach repentance unto the wicked Nephites in my day. And the Holy Ghost has come upon me to preach once again against the wickedness that will prevail in the Church and kingdom in the day when the Lord shall bring again my writings from out of the dust. Yea, thus does the Lord constrain me to declare unto my own descendents in the last days: 
4 When all that has been foretold by the prophets of old, as also by prophets whom the Lord shall raise up among you, and the nations do conspire to enslave the saints and compel them to wickedness, out of the place of fastness shall hiss a voice from out of the dust. And that voice shall speak of my times and the times of my fathers, and of their doing. And this voice shall remind the people of their obligations unto the Lord. Yea, out of the holy place shall a light begin to shine and it will go forth against the will of many. Yet shall it touch the hearts of the righteous and call them to a remembrance of the things which they have covenanted with the Lord their God. 
5 For they shall have promised a thing to the Lord for generations, a thing which they are unwilling to do. Look well into the covenants you make with the Lord, you children of God! Know whereof you speak. For, every oath and covenant you make with Him will be accounted to you to the very lowest denomination. Yea, do not bow your heads and say, yes, but that you mean to do the thing wherewith you do bind yourselves. For, God will not be mocked! 
6 And a hiss and a memory shall issue out of the fast place, and books shall be opened. And prophets and apostles shall say: 
7 What is this book and what is this writing? For we cannot read such things? Who is there who can make a translation of them? For we have no knowledge of this writing. 
8 In that day shall the Lord assemble His saints. Yea, He shall make up His jewels, 
and there shall be seers among you. Wherefore, despise not the work of God, for He will bring to pass a mighty work out of the hands of the weakest and most praiseless of His children. But in their weakness shall they show forth great faith, and in their diligence shall they weaken the bulwark of pride and of wickedness. Look not to the wisdom of the wise nor to the might of the mighty in that day. 
9 For in that day, the wise old men shall look steadfastly upon the prophets, and upon the wisdom of other wise old men. And they shall esteem their words more praiseworthy than the gifts of the Holy Ghost. Yea, in that day shall a man become one with the saints but receive no gift of the Holy Ghost. And it shall be better for them than for they unto whom the Lord Himself speaks. Behold, the Church shall be out of order and the kingdom of God shall grow but shall not prosper in the gifts of the Spirit. 
10 If you are wise, you shall look in those days for the records and remembrances of your fathers and your grandfathers. Howbeit, in their words you will find an ensign. Behold, we have made an experiment upon the covenants made in the High Place. Yea, seeing what would befall the Nephites in the Land Southward, we did come out of Babylon and we did gather together to establish Zion. And, behold my children, we did enjoy peace even when the Land Southward did reel to and fro under the wickedness that the Gadiantons did cause to come among the people. 
11 And are your days so unlike ours? Are your governments filled with corruption and wickedness? Do your rulers buy their seats of power and authority? Does one nation rise up against another for gain’s sake? Do the rich persecute the poor, and does the rich man withhold his substance? Behold, I see your day and I know the conditions in which you labor. Yea, and I also see that many of my own descendents, even the most part, walk in confusion in the daylight, and in complete blindness do they their secret works at night. 
12 You who would call yourselves saints, listen to my words. I am a voice that whispers out of the dust. I lived in this land in a day when the people had all things in common. And behold, when all things were in commotion and the hearts of men had waxed cold, yea, and when the Lord did call His fury down out of heaven to destroy the wickedness from off the face of the earth, behold, we did see the sign and were filled with joy. Yea, when all others quailed in the smoke and darkness of destruction, we did raise up a song of praise and of thanksgiving. 
13 You live in such perilous times. Yet may you also look up with joy and with thanksgiving. In faith you may take up that covenant which your forefathers made and again establish Zion in the land. 
14 But, if you heed not the warning voice that the Lord shall provide for you out of the dust, behold I say unto you, You shall be caught up in the pride of your hearts, and you shall not be found guiltless in your days. And when the wrath of the Lord is kindled against you, how may you beseech the Lord to stay His mighty hand? Yea, what excuse can you make? Shall you say unto the Lord: 
15 Of a surety we did know of the records you raised up unto us Lord, but we did ignore them and the warning contained in them. But see, Lord, how we worship you now. Wherefore, forgive us and stay the destruction. 
16 Behold, the hour shall have passed wherein the Lord might have forgiven such folly. When His anger is kindled, He shall not treat with you. Nay, you shall not even be able to plead your case, for the hour shall have passed. 
17 But when the Lord shall bring these things from out of the earth, the light of truth contained in them shall inspire the pure in heart. And they shall build a refuge place in the tops of the mountains. Then shall the remnant of the Lord’s house build cities of refuge in the everlasting hills and they shall be a resort whereunto, if man will covenant to take up the sword no more against his neighbor, he may find peace and safety there. 
18 And a light shall shine forth from the place of fastness and shall begin to take hold of the hearts of men. And they shall seek again the Holy Ghost and the face of their Savior. Then shall that light begin to spread until it covers all the land. And the pride of the hearts of men shall be extinguished, and they shall succor one another and seek not the things of the world. 
19 And behold, in that day shall the gifts of the Spirit be had by many and miracles shall once again abound. Yea, there shall be disease and suffering, but the saints shall exercise faith again and they shall lay hands on the sufferer, and if they have faith to be healed, behold, they shall be healed. And if they have not faith to be healed but have covenanted, then shall they who have the healing gifts nurture them and succor them. 
20 And the dead who fall in the service of the Lord shall rise again to do His work. And the lame shall walk, who walk in the Lord. And children shall sing again in prophecy to the Lord. Yea, your young men shall see visions again and your young women shall dream dreams. 
21 Wherefore, who would not wish to obtain these blessings? For, I cannot help but to ask the question: Shall my descendents look and yet not see the signs of the times? Or shall they be so wicked that they too shall be caught up in the pride of their hearts? Even that being so, I believe that there shall be those who are not so caught up, or who, being caught up, will not see through the obscurity and into the light. For, I have been commanded to write these things and to give this prophecy. And I ask then, for what purpose? 


CHAPTER 13 
1 Now I must say farewell to all my people. For, I am waxed greatly with age and my time is come. But I leave this record for a remembrance of my days and of my works. As I have said, I believe that my people do rightly. For, they do lift the hands that hang down and they do remember to do all that which the Lord did command us to do when He visited us in His power. 
2 I bless the Lord for all His doings and all His works. Worthy is the Lord our God and I shall praise Him all the days of my life. And I do exhort all my children and all my people to raise up their voices continually unto the Lord. And behold, I do believe that this is the ensign which shall shine forth through the darkness of their day, as also through the corruption and the smoke of darkness in the days that come. 
3 Pray always. Observe to keep the covenants of the High Place, even the Temple of the Lord God. Keep His commandments. Hold to His truth. Ascertain that truth through communion with the Holy Ghost. Walk upon the Way receiving revelation upon revelation. Seek the face of Jesus. Yea, and if you do, you shall surely find Him. Amen. 


CHAPTER 14 
The following is the account of the prophecy of Samuel, the Lamanite, to the Nephites, taken from the Nephite record of Cumorah. This prophecy comprises chapters 13 through 15 of the Book of Helaman found in the record of Nephites. 
1 And now it came to pass in the eighty and sixth year, the Nephites did still remain in wickedness, yea, in great wickedness, while the Lamanites did observe strictly to keep the commandments of God, according to the law of Moses. 
2 And it came to pass that in this year there was one Samuel, a Lamanite, came into the Land of Zarahemla, and began to preach unto the people. And it came to pass that he did preach, many days, repentance unto the people, and they did cast him out, and he was about to return to his own land. 
3 But behold, the voice of the Lord came unto him, that he should return again, and prophesy unto the people whatsoever things should come into his heart. 
4 And it came to pass that they would not suffer that he should enter into the city; therefore he went and got upon the wall thereof, and stretched forth his hand and cried with a loud voice, and prophesied unto the people whatsoever things the Lord put into his heart. 
5 And he said unto them: Behold, I, Samuel, a Lamanite, do speak the words of the Lord which he doth put into my heart; and behold he hath put it into my heart to say unto this people that the sword of justice hangeth over this people; and four hundred years pass not away save the sword of justice falleth upon this people. 
6 Yea, heavy destruction awaiteth this people, and it surely cometh unto this people, and nothing can save this people save it be repentance and faith on the Lord Jesus Christ, who surely shall come into the world, and shall suffer many things and shall be slain for his people. 
7 And behold, an angel of the Lord hath declared it unto me, and he did bring glad tidings to my soul. And behold, I was sent unto you to declare it unto you also, that ye might have glad tidings; but behold ye would not receive me. 
8 Therefore, thus saith the Lord: Because of the hardness of the hearts of the people of the Nephites, except they repent I will take away my word from them, and I will withdraw my Spirit from them, and I will suffer them no longer, and I will turn the hearts of their brethren against them. 
9 And four hundred years shall not pass away before I will cause that they shall be smitten; yea, I will visit them with the sword and with famine and with pestilence. 
10 Yea, I will visit them in my fierce anger, and there shall be those of the fourth generation who shall live, of your enemies, to behold your utter destruction; and this shall surely come except ye repent, saith the Lord; and those of the fourth generation shall visit your destruction. 
11 But if ye will repent and return unto the Lord your God I will turn away mine anger, saith the Lord; yea, thus saith the Lord, blessed are they who will repent and turn unto me, but wo unto him that repenteth not. 
12 Yea, wo unto this great city of Zarahemla; for behold, it is because of those who are righteous that it is saved; yea, wo unto this great city, for I perceive, saith the Lord, that there are many, yea, even the more part of this great city, that will harden their hearts against me, saith the Lord. 
13 But blessed are they who will repent, for them will I spare. But behold, if it were not for the righteous who are in this great city, behold, I would cause that fire should come down out of heaven and destroy it. 
14 But behold, it is for the righteous’ sake that it is spared. But behold, the time cometh, saith the Lord, that when ye shall cast out the righteous from among you, then shall ye be ripe for destruction; yea, wo be unto this great city, because of the wickedness and abominations which are in her. 
15 Yea, and wo be unto the city of Gideon, for the wickedness and abominations which are in her. 
16 Yea, and wo be unto all the cities which are in the land round about, which are possessed by the Nephites, because of the wickedness and abominations which are in them. 
17 And behold, a curse shall come upon the land, saith the Lord of Hosts, because of the people’s sake who are upon the land, yea, because of their wickedness and their abominations. 
18 And it shall come to pass, saith the Lord of Hosts, yea, our great and true God, that whoso shall hide up treasures 
in the earth shall find them again no more, because of the great curse of the land, save he be a righteous man and shall hide it up unto the Lord. 
19 For I will, saith the Lord, that they shall hide up their treasures unto me; and cursed be they who hide not up their treasures unto me; for none hideth up their treasures unto me save it be the righteous; and he that hideth not up his treasures unto me, cursed is he, and also the treasure, and none shall redeem it because of the curse of the land. 
20 And the day shall come that they shall hide up their treasures, because they have set their hearts upon riches; and because they have set their hearts upon their riches, and will hide up their treasures when they shall flee before their enemies; because they will not hide them up unto me, cursed be they and also their treasures; and in that day shall they be smitten, saith the Lord. 
21 Behold ye, the people of this great city, and hearken unto my words; yea, hearken unto the words which the Lord saith; for behold, he saith that ye are cursed because of your riches, and also are your riches cursed because ye have set your hearts upon them, and have not hearkened unto the words of him who gave them unto you. 
22 Ye do not remember the Lord your God in the things with which he hath blessed you, but ye do always remember your riches, not to thank the Lord your God for them; yea, your hearts are not drawn out unto the Lord, but they do swell with great pride, unto boasting, and unto great swelling, envyings, strifes, malice, persecutions, and murders, and all manner of iniquities. 
23 For this cause hath the Lord God caused that a curse should come upon the land, and also upon your riches, and this because of your iniquities. 
24 Yea, woe unto this people, because of this time which has arrived, that ye do cast out the prophets, and do mock them, and cast stones at them, and do slay them, and do all manner of iniquity unto them, even as they did of old time. 
25 And now when ye talk, ye say: If our days had been in the days of our fathers of old, we would not have slain the prophets; we would not have stoned them, and cast them out. 
26 Behold ye are worse than they; for as the Lord liveth, if a prophet come among you and declareth unto you the word of the Lord, which testifieth of your sins and iniquities, ye are angry with him, and cast him out and seek all manner of ways to destroy him; yea, you will say that he is a false prophet, and that he is a sinner, and of the devil, because he testifieth that your deeds are evil. 
27 But behold, if a man shall come among you and shall say: Do this, and there is no iniquity; do that and ye shall not suffer; yea, he will say: Walk after the pride of your own hearts; yea, walk after the pride of your eyes, and do whatsoever your heart desireth—and if a man shall come among you and say this, ye will receive him, and say that he is a prophet. 
28 Yea, ye will lift him up, and ye will give unto him of your substance; ye will give unto him of your gold, and of your silver, and ye will clothe him with costly apparel; and because he speaketh flattering words unto you, and he saith that all is well, then ye will not find fault with him. 
29 O ye wicked and ye perverse generation; ye hardened and ye stiffnecked people, how long will ye suppose that the Lord will suffer you? Yea, how long will ye suffer yourselves to be led by foolish and blind guides? Yea, how long will ye choose darkness rather than light? 
30 Yea, behold, the anger of the Lord is already kindled against you; behold, he hath cursed the land because of your iniquity. 
31 And behold, the time cometh that he curseth your riches, that they become slippery, that ye cannot hold them; and in the days of your poverty ye cannot retain them. 
32 And in the days of your poverty ye shall cry unto the Lord; and in vain shall ye cry, for your desolation is already come upon you, and your destruction is made sure; and then shall ye weep and howl in that day, saith the Lord of Hosts. And then shall ye lament, and say: 
33 O that I had repented, and had not killed the prophets, and stoned them, and cast them out. Yea, in that day ye shall say: O that we had remembered the Lord our God in the day that he gave us our riches, and then they would not have become slippery that we should lose them; for behold, our riches are gone from us. 
34 Behold, we lay a tool here and on the morrow it is gone; and behold, our swords are taken from us in the day we have sought them for battle. 
35 Yea, we have hid up our treasures and they have slipped away from us, because of the curse of the land. 
36 O that we had repented in the day that the word of the Lord came unto us; for behold the land is cursed, and all things are become slippery, and we cannot hold them. 
37 Behold, we are surrounded by demons, yea, we are encircled about by the angels of him who hath sought to destroy our souls. Behold, our iniquities are great. O Lord, canst thou not turn away thine anger from us? And this shall be your language in those days. 
38 But behold, your days of probation are past; ye have procrastinated the day of your salvation until it is everlastingly too late, and your destruction is made sure; yea, for ye have sought all the days of your lives for that which ye could not obtain; and ye have sought for happiness in doing iniquity, which thing is contrary to the nature of that righteousness which is in our great and Eternal Head. 
39 O ye people of the land, that ye would hear my words! And I pray that the anger of the Lord be turned away from you, and that ye would repent and be saved. 


CHAPTER 15 
1 And now it came to pass that Samuel, the Lamanite, did prophesy a great many more things which cannot be written. 
2 And behold, he said unto them: Behold, I give unto you a sign; for five years more cometh, and behold, then cometh the Son of God to redeem all those who shall believe on his name. 
3 And behold, this will I give unto you for a sign at the time of his coming; for behold, there shall be great lights in heaven, insomuch that in the night before he cometh there shall be no darkness, insomuch that it shall appear unto man as if it was day. 
4 Therefore, there shall be one day and a night and a day, as if it were one day and there were no night; and this shall be unto you for a sign; for ye shall know of the rising of the sun and also of its setting; therefore they shall know of a surety that there shall be two days and a night; nevertheless the night shall not be darkened; and it shall be the night before he is born. 
5 And behold, there shall a new star arise, such an one as ye never have beheld; and this also shall be a sign unto you. 
6 And behold this is not all, there shall be many signs and wonders in heaven. 
7 And it shall come to pass that ye shall all be amazed, and wonder, insomuch that ye shall fall to the earth. 
8 And it shall come to pass that whosoever shall believe on the Son of God, the same shall have everlasting life. 
9 And behold, thus hath the Lord commanded me, by his angel, that I should come and tell this thing unto you; yea, he hath commanded that I should prophesy these things unto you; yea, he hath said unto me: Cry unto this people, repent and prepare the way of the Lord. 
10 And now, because I am a Lamanite, and have spoken unto you the words which the Lord hath commanded me, and because it was hard against you, ye are angry with me and do seek to destroy me, and have cast me out from among you. 
11 And ye shall hear my words, for, for this intent have I come up upon the walls of this city, that ye might hear and know of the judgments of God which do await you because of your iniquities, and also that ye might know the conditions of repentance; 
12 And also that ye might know of the coming of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of heaven and of earth, the Creator of all things from the beginning; and that ye might know of the signs of his coming, to the intent that ye might believe on his name. 
13 And if ye believe on his name ye will repent of all your sins, that thereby ye may have a remission of them through his merits. 
14 And behold, again, another sign I give unto you, yea, a sign of his death. 
15 For behold, he surely must die that salvation may come; yea, it behooveth him and becometh expedient that he dieth, to bring to pass the resurrection of the dead, that thereby men may be brought into the presence of the Lord. 
16 Yea, behold, this death bringeth to pass the resurrection, and redeemeth all mankind from the first death—that spiritual death; for all mankind, by the fall of Adam being cut off from the presence of the Lord, are considered as dead, both as to things temporal and to things spiritual. 
17 But behold, the resurrection of Christ redeemeth mankind, yea, even all mankind, and bringeth them back into the presence of the Lord. 
18 Yea, and it bringeth to pass the condition of repentance, that whosoever repenteth the same is not hewn down and cast into the fire; but whosoever repenteth not is hewn down and cast into the fire; and there cometh upon them again a spiritual death, yea, a second death, for they are cut off again as to things pertaining to righteousness. 
19 Therefore repent ye, repent ye, lest by knowing these things and not doing them ye shall suffer yourselves to come under condemnation, and ye are brought down unto this second death. 
20 But behold, as I said unto you concerning another sign, a sign of his death, behold, in that day that he shall suffer death the sun shall be darkened and refuse to give his light unto you; and also the moon and the stars; and there shall be no light upon the face of this land, even from the time that he shall suffer death, for the space of three days, to the time that he shall rise again from the dead. 
21 Yea, at the time that he shall yield up the ghost there shall be thunderings and lightnings for the space of many hours, and the earth shall shake and tremble; and the rocks which are upon the face of this earth, which are both above the earth and beneath, which ye know at this time are solid, or the more part of it is one solid mass, shall be broken up; 
22 Yea, they shall be rent in twain, and shall ever after be found in seams and in cracks, and in broken fragments upon the face of the whole earth, yea, both above the earth and beneath. 
23 And behold, there shall be great tempests, and there shall be many mountains laid low, like unto a valley, and there shall be many places which are now called valleys which shall become mountains, whose height is great. 
24 And many highways shall be broken up, and many cities shall become desolate. 
25 And many graves shall be opened, and shall yield up many of their dead; and many saints shall appear unto many. 
26 And behold, thus hath the angel spoken unto me; for he said unto me that there should be thunderings and lightnings for the space of many hours. 
27 And he said unto me that while the thunder and the lightning lasted, and the tempest, that these things should be, and that darkness should cover the face of the whole earth for the space of three days. 
28 And the angel said unto me that many shall see greater things than these, to the intent that they might believe that these signs and these wonders should come to pass upon all the face of this land, to the intent that there should be no cause for unbelief among the children of men— 
29 And this to the intent that whosoever will believe might be saved, and that whosoever will not believe, a righteous judgment might come upon them; and also if they are condemned they bring upon themselves their own condemnation. 
30 And now remember, remember, my brethren, that whosoever perisheth, perisheth unto himself; and whosoever doeth iniquity, doeth it unto himself; for behold, ye are free; ye are permitted to act for yourselves; for behold, God hath given unto you a knowledge and he hath made you free. 
31 He hath given unto you that ye might know good from evil, and he hath given unto you that ye might choose life or death; and ye can do good and be restored unto that which is good, or have that which is good restored unto you; or ye can do evil, and have that which is evil restored unto you. 


CHAPTER 16 
1 And now, my beloved brethren, behold, I declare unto you that except ye shall repent your houses shall be left unto you desolate. 
2 Yea, except ye repent, your women shall have great cause to mourn in the day that they shall give suck; for ye shall attempt to flee and there shall be no place for refuge; yea, and wo unto them which are with child, for they shall be heavy and cannot flee; therefore, they shall be trodden down and shall be left to perish. 
3 Yea, wo unto this people who are called the people of Nephi except they shall repent, when they shall see all these signs and wonders which shall be showed unto them; for behold, they have been a chosen people of the Lord; yea, the people of Nephi hath he loved, and also hath he chastened them; yea, in the days of their iniquities hath he chastened them because he loveth them. 
4 But behold my brethren, the Lamanites hath he hated because their deeds have been evil continually, and this because of the iniquity of the tradition of their fathers. But behold, salvation hath come unto them through the preaching of the Nephites; and for this intent hath the Lord prolonged their days. 
5 And I would that ye should behold that the more part of them are in the path of their duty, and they do walk circumspectly before God, and they do observe to keep his commandments and his statutes and his judgments according to the law of Moses. 
6 Yea, I say unto you, that the more part of them are doing this, and they are striving with unwearied diligence that they may bring the remainder of their brethren to the knowledge of the truth; therefore there are many who do add to their numbers daily. 
7 And behold, ye do know of yourselves, for ye have witnessed it, that as many of them as are brought to the knowledge of the truth, and to know of the wicked and abominable traditions of their fathers, and are led to believe the holy scriptures, yea, the prophecies of the holy prophets, which are written, which leadeth them to faith on the Lord, and unto repentance, which faith and repentance bringeth a change of heart unto them— 
8 Therefore, as many as have come to this, ye know of yourselves are firm and steadfast in the faith, and in the thing wherewith they have been made free. 
9 And ye know also that they have buried their weapons of war, and they fear to take them up lest by any means they should sin; yea, ye can see that they fear to sin—for behold they will suffer themselves that they be trodden down and slain by their enemies, and will not lift their swords against them, and this because of their faith in Christ. 
10 And now, because of their steadfastness when they do believe in that thing which they do believe, for because of their firmness when they are once enlightened, behold, the Lord shall bless them and prolong their days, notwithstanding their iniquity— 
11 Yea, even if they should dwindle in unbelief the Lord shall prolong their days, until the time shall come which hath been spoken of by our fathers, and also by the prophet Zenos, and many other prophets, concerning the restoration of our brethren, the Lamanites, again to the knowledge of the truth— 
12 Yea, I say unto you, that in the latter times the promises of the Lord have been extended to our brethren, the Lamanites; and notwithstanding the many afflictions which they shall have, and notwithstanding they shall be driven to and fro upon the face of the earth, and be hunted, and shall be smitten and scattered abroad, having no place for refuge, the Lord shall be merciful unto them. 
13 And this is according to the prophecy, that they shall again be brought to the true knowledge, which is the knowledge of their Redeemer, and their great and true shepherd, and be numbered among his sheep. 
14 Therefore I say unto you, it shall be better for them than for you except ye repent. 
15 For behold, had the mighty works been shown unto them which have been shown unto you, yea, unto them who have dwindled in unbelief because of the traditions of their fathers, ye can see of yourselves that they never would again have dwindled in unbelief. 
16 Therefore, saith the Lord: I will not utterly destroy them, but I will cause that in the day of my wisdom they shall return again unto me, saith the Lord. 
17 And now behold, saith the Lord, concerning the people of the Nephites: If they will not repent, and observe to do my will, I will utterly destroy them, saith the Lord, because of their unbelief notwithstanding the many mighty works which I have done among them; and as surely as the Lord liveth shall these things be, saith the Lord.
________________




THE BOOK OF MANTI
THE SON OF OUG 
CHAPTER 1 
1 Behold, I am Manti and my father was Oug, the same who was the prophet at the time of Christ’s coming to the Nem of Mentina. And I am the youngest of the sons of Oug. Nevertheless, I was present and did witness the Savior when He came in His glory to the Temple at Mentina. And I did also hear Him speak and I did see all His doings with the people, save that which He spoke unto the thirteen chosen to be His apostles. 
2 And when my father became old, he delivered to me the keeping of this place and of the records kept here. Yea, and he did admonish me to make the libraries safe. So have I done in all my days. 
3 Behold, the records are many, for we have also found many books containing the works and words of the Jaredites, and even some few which we believe originate in other places and are of a more ancient nature. And I did cause that the places wherein we do keep the records be made strong. For, the cavities which the people of Hagoth and Hagmeni dug for to keep the books were cramped and not well constructed, and there was the threat of collapse. Wherefore, in accordance with the command of my father, and also with the desires of my own heart, I caused that a system of caverns be dug to hold the records safely. 
4 And behold, these caverns were dug in a cunning manner, and they were constructed with such skill that one feels as if one is standing in the room of a building or a temple. And behold, I did also cause that there should be a means whereby the records could be read without removing them from their place of safety. Wherefore, the most cunning artisans were sought and a system of shafts were cut into the living rock, just as the rooms and corridors were also cut out, and mirrors were so placed as to provide light to them that came to read the books. 
5 Now, many people did come from many places to read the books. Yea, and there was a constant traffic upon the roads from the South, and from the East, and from the North. For, we know that Jesus did visit other people and places. Yea, we know that He did go unto the Nem of Corianton, and we believe that He did visit all the people left in the land. Wherefore, many come to Mentina from many places to read the books and to study with the learned of our city, and also to learn the ways and the ordinances of the temple. 
6 And behold, there is a constant traffic of trade from all the peoples of the land, both in the North and in the South. And many do travel in the caravans and upon the roads. Wherefore, when they come to Mentina, many travelers do also desire to rest and to read the books. Yea, because of the traffic to and from the libraries, and also to and from the temple, the city of Mentina has become an important city. 
7 And behold, the councils of the city, and also of the region round about, over which the city had influence, did request that I bring together artisans again and that we build up the temple and certain other parts of the city. And I did as the councils requested, and I caused that a work of construction be commenced to build up the temple so that it could accommodate the many people who came to the city to participate in the ordinances thereof. 
8 Now behold, this is the manner of the temple that I caused to be built under the direction of the council. The temple consists of seven buildings whose foundations are made of stone from the surrounding mountains. But behold, we did only stretch forth our tools upon the stones to be used as the foundations of the temples, and never did we construct any altar of cut stone. 
9 And the floor of each building was completely flat and level, and stairs led up to the buildings. Notwithstanding, though stairs led up to the buildings, for they were all built upon a hill and to move from one temple to the next in succession, one needed to ascend the hill. Wherefore, there was need for stairs to lead from one temple up to another. But behold, within the temple buildings there are no stairs, and the altars sit upon the level floor. Now, in this we believe we do follow the admonition of God. Yea, our altars are made of uncut stone and we have no stairs leading up to the altar. 
10 And the temples begin at the base of the hill with the Place of Adam, and they progress up the hill until one reaches the Place of Eve. And it is in the Place of Eve where the sacred anointing of husbands and wives takes place. Wherefore, the seven buildings of the temple do form a stair ascending the temple hill. And this temple overlooks the lake and the surrounding country. 
11 Now, we had much timber with which to build. Wherefore, we used timber in all our construction. And the workmanship of the timber was exceeding fine, surpassing any workmanship of wood that had ever been seen in the Land Northward. But behold, this was not by design, for we did not set out to build anything but that which was needed by the people. Notwithstanding, the artisans went to their work with such love and care that the finished temple was beautiful beyond description. And behold, many visit the temple today merely to look upon the intricate designs with which the artisans adorned the temple. Surely, it is a work of beauty unsurpassed in all the land, and I deem this right. For, ought we not to do our best work for the Lord? And it is a marvelous thing that the people do in making covenants in His Holy House. Wherefore, I can think of no better gift that the artisans could have made to their God, but that they give the finest work they could. 
12 But this is not all. To honor the Lord, these same artisans did also make more commodious and comfortable the public houses wherein the visitors to the temple do stay. This they did to remind the visitors, who came either for trade, to read the books or to go up to the temple, of the sacred nature of the city of Mentina and the sacred purpose the inhabitants thereof had taken upon themselves. Wherefore, the city of Mentina grew in renown throughout all the land. 
13 Now, as I have written in another place, the brethren of my father did return again unto the Nem, just as Jesus foretold that they would, and they rejoiced in all that my father had done to prepare a place for their return. But behold, one Timothy, yea, even that Timothy who did ask with his brothers to remain until Christ should come again, journeyed with them. And he brought unto my father a book recounting all that had taken place in the Land Southward. And behold, because of this it became the custom of the people in the Land Northward and in the Land Southward to exchange records each year one with another. But this was a work that was taken up by the Three alone. 
14 Wherefore, every year at the Festival of Lights, one or more of the Three do bring up unto us here in the North, word of all the doings of our relations in the South. And we do write all the things that they speak to us concerning them, and we do keep a record of their doing. 
15 But this is not all. They do also teach us and we do sit at their feet to learn more perfectly the things of the Lord. For, the Three do not taste of death and do have constant concourse with Angels and with God. And behold, they do teach us how to place our feet upon the Way, that we may also have this great blessing. And many do avail themselves each year of their teachings. Behold, because of this, there are many prophets in the city of Mentina and in the region round about, and we do enjoy a continual state of communion with the heavens. For we do walk and talk with our ancestors and with the spirits of just men and women made perfect. And our joy and our contentment at these happy and holy circumstances cannot be expressed. 


CHAPTER 2 
1 And now it is twenty and five years after the coming of Jesus unto the Nem of Mentina, and we have enjoyed continuous peace and thanksgiving in Mentina. And we do welcome people from all parts of the world, even from the far Isles of the Sea both to the westward and to the eastward. And even there have come unto us visitors from far places in the north, where one may walk across the oceans in the cold season of the year. Yea, we do welcome and learn from all people who come to us to read the books and to participate with us in the ordinances of the temple. 
2 And I would speak somewhat about these ordinances, for they are precious to me and of great import to my people. Behold, the ordinances of the temple do seal our work with that of the Lord. For, it is in the temple that we betoken the covenants that we have made with God. Yea, we go up unto the temple in order that our covenants may culminate in the tokens, which are given in holy ordinances. And these ordinances we do perform in the temple. 
3 And behold, every one of the Nem are taught the meanings of the covenants from their youth. Yea, from the time that a little child is able to understand a mother's words, the covenants and ordinances of the temple are taught. In this way, no person may say that they do not know whereof they speak or act when they bow their heads and receive the laws of God. 
4 These are the buildings of the Temple of Mentina and their purposes. As I said before, the temple is divided into seven buildings, each of which has a certain purpose. The first is the Place of Adam. In this building we are instructed in all ways concerning the Law of Obedience. It is here that we are instructed in the Everlasting Covenant and in the New and Everlasting Covenant. Yea, we learn of our descent, of the Father, the Son and of the Holy Ghost. We learn of the Mother and the Father and who they of a surety are, so that we may also know of a surety who we are. Because of this instruction, we more fully understand the words of the scriptures and the commandments of God. Yea, because of this instruction, we may covenant to keep the Law of Obedience, having received the knowledge of our pre-existent state. 
5 Now, the purification after the manner of the Ammonites, as also the ordinance of baptism and of prayer and of fasting, are all ordinances preparatory to going up to the Place of Adam and it is well that we all take care to be pure and clean and that our intentions are good before we go up to the temple. 
6 From the Place of Adam, one moves into the Place of the World. This building has no stairs leading to it, but is on the same level as the Place of Adam. In this building we are instructed of the creation of heaven and earth, and of the beautiful place wherein our first parents were placed. We learn of the decisions they had to make in order to provide for our existence. We also learn of the temptations of Satan and the consequences of following his counsel. We also learn of repentance. This is part of the Law of Obedience. 
7 From the Place of the World, we ascend to the Place of Sacrifice. In this place we learn of the choices and actions that our first parents made in order to become worthy to receive light and knowledge from heaven. We ascend into this building because it marks the first of the reparative footsteps of Adam and Eve, steps which we must also follow in order to return into the presence of God. In this place we are instructed in the meaning of the Law of Sacrifice and how we may also offer up a living sacrifice unto God for the sake of all living, and for the sake of the dead. It is in this place that the robes of the priesthood are placed upon the man and the woman. The woman wears the robes on both shoulders and the man on that shoulder fitting his development and his progress. 
8 From the Place of Sacrifice, we ascend to the Place of Virtue. In this place we learn of all the ways in which Satan does try to pervert the right ways of the Lord. We learn of the Law of Chastity, which is representative of all the virtues of heaven. We learn how, by committing to bind ourselves to Christ, we do also bind ourselves unto our wife or our husband. Yea, it is through the Holy Spirit of Promise, even the Holy Ghost and His power, that we are sealed unto Christ. Wherefore, all covenants that we make, when we are sealed up His, remain operative both in the time of our earthly existence as well as into eternity. It is in this building that we make a covenant to our spouse and to God, and this covenant becomes a token of our commitment to aspire to all virtues and all the gifts of the Spirit. 
9 From the Place of Virtue, we ascend to the Place of the Way. In this place, we learn of the Way which the Creator provided whereby we may be introduced into that world wherein we may have constant concourse with Angels and with our relations. It is in this place that we learn and grow in all good things by and through the power of the Holy Ghost unto revelation. Yea, we learn to walk upon the Way and receive abundantly of the grandfathers, and our hearts are turned unto them. And behold, when our hearts are turned unto the grandfathers, their hearts are also turned unto us. Yea, and we may receive such instruction there as cannot even be imagined here. Yea, insomuch that we may even be brought into the presence of the Christ, and be instructed directly by Him. 
10 From the Place of the Way we ascend to the Place of the Endowment. In this place we are instructed in all the ways and practices of the priesthood and how we may exercise it to the good of all people. But this is not all. It is also in this place that we receive the tokens of the covenants we have made. Wherefore, if our intentions remain pure, we may call upon the powers of heaven in times of need. And is this not an Endowment of Power? Yea, to walk upon the Way and to have the power of heaven is an endowment indeed. 
11 From the Place of the Endowment we ascend to the Place of Eve. In this place the man is found to be worthy to stand with the woman and the robes of authority and of sovereignty and of priesthood are placed upon the shoulders of the man and the woman together. In this place the woman and the man perform the Second Anointing and they wait upon the Lord. It is in this place that the Lord does visit them and they receive a sure and certain witness of their acceptance before Him. Yea, He does take them by the hand and introduce them into that world wherein the Father dwells. 
12 These are the seven buildings of the temple, and they are most sacred. 


CHAPTER 3 
1 Now, I have written many records concerning the works of the Nem during my lifetime and they are all placed in the libraries of Mentina. Yea, I have written much, but I do perceive by the Spirit that not all of my writings will be brought out of the dust in the last days. For, the bulk of my writings have more to do with the earthly works of the people and of their building a nation. 
2 But behold, I do wish to be remembered for the spiritual building of our nation as well. And this may be pride in me, but it is nevertheless my desire that my descendents remember that their grandfather did strive all his life to build up Zion among all the people. And I believe we did this in my lifetime. Wherefore, the Lord will forgive me, I hope, that I do express some pride that we did what He commanded us. Yea, and I do admit that we do celebrate with song and with dancing and with great rejoicing that we have sought His face and listened to His voice. And if we be judged for this, behold, I believe that the judgment will be just, and that we will again stand with Him in righteousness in the eternities, howbeit we did puff ourselves a little bit in the pride of our hearts. 
3 For behold, we did as a people build many cities in my lifetime. Yea, many cities did grow up in the land. And following the everlasting hills, one can hardly travel one day without finding refuge in one of the cities of the Nem in the Land Northward. And from the great mountains even to the coasts of the Western Sea, the same does apply. The traveler can disembark on the coast of the sea, having traveled from the Isles of the Sea, and then proceed east and not spend one day in travel but that he has not come upon a city of the Nem for refuge in the night. 
4 And behold, from the great mountains traveling into the east, one is already in the lands of the Nem of Corianton and their cities are spread out upon the whole face of the land, even unto the eastern sea, and also far into the north. Wherefore, the whole face of the Land Northward is spread with cities and many roads have been built to connect them. 
5 Yea, and all the people do engage in trade together, one city taking of its increase and trading with another. In this way, one city is no different than any other, save only perhaps in size. For, they are all refuges to the traveler and the trader, and none are turned back from the gate. For, whereas in the time of my fathers the cities were built to be refuges against the Gadiantons, in my day, the cities are become more refuges from the elements than from evil doers. For, we have all things in common and there are no more Gadiantons among us. 
6 And it is because of this happy state of union wherein we did find ourselves because of the knowledge we had of our Christ and of the covenants we had made unto Him, that many people began to come into our lands from other parts of the world and we did welcome them. Yea, there were people from Jerusalem of old who did travel unto our shores. And also, there were curious looking people from afar to the West, even across the Western Sea, who did come to live upon the land and they also became Nem. And this because of the great peace which we did enjoy after the coming of the Son of God. 
7 And behold, they do also bring many of their own beliefs and writings. Wherefore, we gained a witness that God does love all people. For, in many of their writings and beliefs and practices, we do see elements of those things which Christ and the prophets taught us. Yea, we do see truths in the things they also taught us from their lands and their cultures. And it was because we do walk upon the Way and we do constantly seek the guidance that only a confirmation of the Holy Ghost may bring that we do not grow confused. 
8 For, our faith is certain and our knowledge is sure. Wherefore, how may we be confused by the teachings of other races and other nations if our own intentions are pure and our eye single to the glory of God? For does He not raise up prophets unto all nations? Or, where the things of the Spirit are concerned, are we alone in all the world? Behold, that would be pride indeed, to believe that God may only talk through the Nem. 
9 We are not alone. For, the Holy Ghost does work upon the hearts of men everywhere. And, even if it so be that the hearts of men in general do wax gross, yea, and even the whole of a nation does succumb and the eyes of their spirits be filled with darkness, still, there shall be some few who strive to become enlightened. Unto such will the Spirit ever hasten? Yea, even though the entire nation become filled with corruption and darkness, if there be but one soul seeking the light and truth of the gospel, the Holy Ghost shall nurture and comfort that one soul. 
10 Wherefore, we did accept the teaching of other peoples insofar as the Spirit does guide. And if the Spirit speaks not on a certain matter, we do not embrace the doctrine, but we do honor the belief. But behold, if the Spirit testifies against a practice or a doctrine which did flow unto us from another people, we do preach the gospel unto them and admonish them to re-think the matter. In this way we do always conduct ourselves in a manner which we believe will bring upon us the approbation of a just and loving God. And in this we think to avoid the judgments of God. For, we seek all truth in all circumstances, and in this we think to honor God and all His followers, regardless of their origin. 
11 But I do warn and forewarn all those who might find and read these writings of mine. Seek not truth from foreigners, but from God. And seek not to confirm the truth through the writings of other people, for this is vanity. The wisest of their wise men cannot confirm the truth of one thing. Let the Holy Ghost confirm all things unto you, be they written by your own hand, or by the hand of a foreigner. For, how can one man confirm the truth to another? Does he have all things before him? Then how can one nation confirm the truth to another? Does that nation possess all truth? Wherefore can that nation be a confirmation of truth unto another? Whereas, if you seek the guidance of the Holy Ghost in all things, you cannot be deceived, for, only the Spirit may bring all things to your remembrance. 
12 Behold, I say unto you, Unless you are guided in all things by the Spirit, you will be tripped up. Yea, no matter your intention, you will be deceived from time to time. The same has happened even to the Nem and so let our experience be an ensample unto you. Yea, let me recount unto you a disturbance that did trouble the people of Mentina for a time because they failed to subject all things unto the confirmation of the Holy Ghost. 
13 Some fifteen years after the coming of Jesus unto the Nem of Mentina, there came into the city a traveler. Now, this traveler had come from a far away country. Yea, he had traveled to the lands of the Nem by first crossing the great western ocean and, following the rumor of a great city in the mountains, he did find his way slowly unto Mentina. And the rumor of him also went even as far as Mentina as he made his slow progress toward the city. 
14 And the story went abroad that this was a great teacher from across the sea. And he came teaching strange doctrines, many of which seemed alike to that which the Savior had taught. For, he taught of peace and of love and of justice to all men. And these things seemed pleasing unto them that heard them. Wherefore, we awaited in anticipation the arrival in Mentina of this sage from across the sea. And when he did finally arrive, we did welcome him into our city and we did spend much time listening to his teachings. 
15 Now, the name of this man was Fua-Zen. And behold, of all his teachings we did receive the confirmation of the Spirit – of all but one. Yea, in all things he did teach of love and of charity. He taught of justice and constancy. He taught that man should seek the face of his Creator. Yea, in fine, he taught many things that we knew to be truths and we rejoiced that one from so far away could have such teaching in common with our own. 
16 But behold, he did teach one thing against which our prophets had been warned, and about which our scriptures spoke. Yea, he did teach that a man might take to himself more than one wife and be justified in it. He taught that the man is the head of the woman, and if the head of one woman, why not the head of many? Yea, principle to his teaching was the doctrine that the salvation of the woman depended upon the worthiness of the man to whom she was wed. It was his belief that an honorable man could feel free to take as many wives as his resources would allow and that it was the duty of all men to so conduct their lives and their business to afford the man this luxury. 
17 Now, this teaching brought about some little controversy among the men of Mentina. For, there were some who believed this doctrine. For, they opened the scriptures and found instances where they did justify the allowance of whom they called righteous men to take to themselves more than one wife. And they did begin to contend with the councils of the city, insisting that the temple should allow men to be sealed unto as many women as his means would allow. 
18 Thus we see how a doctrine concerning marriage can bring down Zion. For, if marriage, whether it be to one spouse or to one hundred, is to be predicated on the means of the individual, then the institution has become corrupted by property and the getting of gain becomes more important than any other principle in the society. Wherefore, the councils of the city were against the doctrine. 
19 But behold, I did exhort the people to take the matter privately to the Lord and rely upon that trust which they had in Him. For, we know that He will always make good the promise He made unto us. Yea, we know that by the power of the Holy Ghost we may ascertain the truth of all things. Wherefore, we did all take the matter severally to the Lord in this manner. 
20 And behold, the Holy Ghost did come upon us and did answer our question. Yea, and I was taken up upon the Way and the Lord did converse with me personally. And He did teach me certain truths about the doctrine that I had not considered. And because of the things He did teach me, I could see how the Lord might justify the practice in circumstances which He deemed appropriate to the occasion, but how He would, in all other circumstances, condemn it. 
21 And these are the words He spoke unto me while upon the Way: 
22 Behold, it is good that you have brought this matter unto me. Yea, I am pleased that this whole people should cry unto me for an answer concerning this thing. And they have asked me how it is that Abraham was justified and had more than one wife, and also Jacob. For behold, I did not give unto them more than one wife, but Abram did hearken unto his wife Sarai and did not inquire of me and did take Hagar to wife. As for Jacob it was through trickery and deceit that he entered into taking upon him more than one wife. In this my servants did transgress, but they did repent and did make a new covenant with me, and I did give them a new name even Abraham and Israel. And after they entered into this covenant with me they were obedient until the end, because of this covenant their posterity became my covenant people yea even the house of Israel. Now behold, because of the diligence of this people which are also of the house of Israel, I shall answer this question. Wherefore, my servant, Manti, record these words in a book. 
23 At sundry times and in diverse places, it becomes necessary to build up a nation quickly. Yea, a nation that will follow the commandments of God. For, I use the nations to do my work. At those times and in those places I have given unto men more than one wife. And this is in accordance with another law which I gave unto my people Israel. It is in accordance with that law which provides for the wife of a man who dies without begetting children. Yea, according to that law, the brother of the man shall take to himself his brother’s wife, for it was deemed a reproach for a woman to be without children. And that man should bring up children unto his brother in an act of love and charity. And in the day of resurrection, when men and women are neither married nor given in marriage, that man shall take the hand of the wife of his brother and place it into the hand of his brother. In that day, he shall thank his brother for the service he has rendered unto him from out of the love of his heart. 
24 Behold, this act of charity and love does justify the taking of another to wife. And it is in this vein that I do sometimes command men to take more than one wife for to bring up a righteous generation. But behold, the man may not covenant with her for eternity, for she is another's. And the woman cannot covenant with a married man, for he is already married. 
25 Behold, it is the purpose of man and of woman to follow in the footsteps of their first parents, even Adam and Eve, even to the very veil of heaven. And, making covenants one with another, to become sealed unto me. And when they are sealed unto me, their covenants which they have made together become binding and operable in the eternities, because the covenants are sealed unto me with the man and the woman. In this way, they avail themselves of the atonement which I made through the power of the Holy Ghost. Wherefore, they become like unto Adam and Eve, and like unto me, and like unto my Father and my Mother in Heaven. Behold, he becomes First Man and she becomes First Woman, and they are one. 
26 And I say unto you, even though I justify the taking of more than one wife for to fulfill my purposes, still shall a man be sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise to but one woman, and a woman shall be sealed by that same Spirit to but one man. And this is the manner of marriage in the eternities, regardless of the custom of men in mortality. 
27 And I declare unto you, if you base the marriage upon property or the getting of gain, yea, if the number of husbands or wives devolves upon the means of the man or the woman, the same is wickedness and abomination. Yea, I shall not justify it and surely this practice shall bring down a people and the nation. Behold, I am Jesus Christ and I have spoken it. 
28 Now, when I had spoken these words from the little book that I had made to record them, many people did testify that the same had come to them. Yea, the Spirit did confirm it upon our souls and we knew that the doctrine as the sage had recounted it to us was false. 
29 And behold, when we told him of the promptings of the Spirit, and of the revelations and the visions of God which we had received concerning the matter, he too was troubled in his heart. And I did exhort him also to ask of God whether the things we had said were true. For, I could not hold him to a different standard than I did hold myself. For, having heard of this doctrine from him, and taking it not for granted that it was right or wrong, I did seek the confirmation of the Holy Ghost. Wherefore, I did exhort him to do the same. 
30 And he did retire from us for the space of many hours. And when he did return to the council, he bowed himself low before us and begged for the forgiveness of all the people. And these are his words unto the council: 
31 Today I have learned a great lesson. I have learned that the wisdom of the wise cannot compare to the gifts of the Spirit. For, though the practice of my people of taking as many wives as one can support is a corrupt practice, if only because of the tendency it might cause for a man to concentrate on the things of this world over the things of heaven. And also, I have discovered the meaning of your own practices and the doctrines you teach concerning the High Place, and I do see that your beliefs center upon attaining to a higher sphere than do the beliefs of my people. For, my people do all that they do for their own comfort and convenience. Conversely, you do all that you do for the comfort and convenience of all people at once. And I see that this is a greater good, for, what better thing can a man do than to work for the salvation of all living? How foolish is a doctrine that centers one's thoughts on the accumulation of the things of the world? 
32 Yea, all my life I have sought wisdom from the sages of my people. So great was my searching that my own people began even to call me sage. Yet, my wisdom was just a repeating of the traditions of my people. You have taught me a great test of wisdom. From this time forth, I will submit all things to the confirmation of this Holy Ghost of whom you teach. For, I have sat with my ancestors and sought wisdom from them in this place you call the Way. And all the things they taught me were good in my sight. But, when I prayed that the truth of them be known unto me by the power of the Holy Ghost, I found that certain of the things I had been taught were truths and still others were mere traditions. And how is a man to sort truth from tradition? Or truth from culture? It cannot be done by genius. For a man does not have all the information needed to make a qualified decision. Wherefore, because our ancestors have the weight of generations behind them, we accept their beliefs as truth. But still, because a thing has the weight of generations in practice, this cannot signify that the thing is true. For, I know of nations whose practices are most abominable. Yet, their ways have been practiced by them for many generations. 
33 I thank you, Nem. For, you have taught me patiently, and I have learned from you a great and marvelous truth. I have learned that there is a way to ascertain the rightness of a thing, and that is to submit one's own will to the greater universal good. When I submit my will and humble myself, I am able to ask for heavenly guidance. When I ask for help from God with real intent, having faith that I shall indeed receive an answer, then the Holy Ghost testifies of truth. Then do I have not just the weight of some few generations of common practice, but I have the testimony of nations, kindreds, tongues, and peoples, through all generations of time. And behold, that knowledge is ingrained into my very being in such a way that I could not deny nor controvert it in any manner. 
34 Wherefore, what shall you have me do that I may stay here with you and learn all that I may from you? Yea, I would commit the rest of my days to learn the things that this whole people do now practice. 
35 Whereupon, the council did clap their hands together joyfully and sang out in joy. For, this great man from a far away land was touched by the Spirit of Truth. Yea, and he desired to learn more. Wherefore, all the people were filled with joy at his willingness to set aside the things of the world and the traditions of his fathers, desiring a better way and a better truth. 
36 Wherefore I said unto him: 
37 All we ask of you is that you become our brother and that you partake with us in the blessings of the Nem. And when you are filled with all that you can learn from us, do sit with us and teach us from your stores of wisdom. We will submit all things to the confirmation of the Spirit, for this is our way. But do not shut your mouth, but let us benefit from all that you have learned from your own people. 
38 And behold, he did remain with us many years. And when he did return to his own land, we sent with him copies of many of the books in the libraries. For, he was determined to teach his people the ways of the Lord and of the High Place. Yea, he desired to establish Zion among his own people and teach them also to have all things in common. 


CHAPTER 4 
1 Now behold, as I have already written, the works of this people are not to be contained in so small a book as this that I pass down to my descendents. It is enough for me to know that my children will have something of my teachings and my doings to remember me by, and also by which they may also remember the ways and customs of the Nem, and ponder them in their hearts. 
2 Not long after Fua Zen left to return to his own people, behold Timothy again visited the people of Mentina. Now, I have written of his first visit in another place, how that when my uncles returned to Mentina as the Lord promised that they would, Timothy also came with them and brought with him a book containing all the works of our brethren in the Land Southward since the great day of the Lord. And Timothy was a man filled with a solemn spirit and a sadness that is difficult to describe. Nevertheless, he is one of the Three who will not taste of death until the Lord comes again to finish His work. Wherefore, he is also filled with the spirit of the Lord and with the Holy Ghost. 
3 And when he had heard us tell the story of the conversion of Fua Zen, he was pleased, and he said: 
4 Great is the Lord and merciful. For, because of your ensample, Fua Zen will return unto his own people and he will teach many great things that will be the means of many wonders and miracles among his people. For, I know from whence he came and have even walked among his people myself. And behold, they are a people of great faith, but their faith is largely upon what they can do in the body. Yet, there are some among them who will embrace the teaching of this great sage and they will begin to experiment upon the precepts he learned here. So much will their worship and their faith be affected that a new belief and a new religion shall arise out of the teachings he shall take from here and bestow upon his people. Yea, and in the latter day, many people will look upon what they read in the records of your people and see great similarities in the writings and beliefs from the people across the sea, writings which they have kept and handed down from generation to generation. 
5 And Timothy did proceed to review with us all the ordinances and practices of the High Place, and he found that we were adhering to the letter and the spirit of all that we had been commanded to do. Yea, we had remained faithful to the things that the Lord had taught us through the unspeakable gift He had given us. Yea, and he did teach us further concerning the temple, saying: 
6 Behold, blessed are the Nem for the faithfulness with which they do strive to keep the commandments and the ordinances of God. And they do it as a great exercise of faith, a thing which pleases God very much. 
7 Now, faith is more than belief. It is that power which moves upon the deep and causes it to come together and perform the will of the Father. It was through the exercise of faith that the very matter of the universe was created. This matter we all have in common. Wherefore, when that same faith is exercised, it is recognized by that matter. This is why one may be moved upon by the Spirit to do a certain thing, and if one is obedient to that commandment, a miracle takes place. Is it done by the faithfulness of the individual? I say unto you, Nay. Or is it done by the power that resides in the individual? Not at all. The miracle takes place because the substance is moved upon by that same power by which it was brought into being in the first instance. 
8 Here is a mystery that I shall reveal unto you. There is no particle of matter, or anything with which we have to do, that is wasted. It may be used in this generation by you and I, and it may make up our bodies, and the things around us. And yet, when we lay this mortal down, do you suppose that the matter which was loaned to us for a time, is no longer utilized in the creation? Do you suppose that because the likes of you and I touched a thing that it must remain as we touched it forever? 
9 Behold, I say unto you, This is vanity. For, there is nothing that is made that is wasted simply because it is utilized once by man or any other created thing. When we lay this material by, it returns unto the earth and is used again in the ongoing creation. Wherefore, all matter that exists today has made a journey through many mortal bodies. Yea, a journey that binds us all together. 
10 Yea, this physical body which I possess today is made up of matter that has passed through countless generations of creations just like me. And when I exercise faith, every particle remembers the day when the Creator first so exercised His will upon the deep. And behold, recognizing that same exercise, in His name, and in connection with His will, the very elements respond in accordance with the decrees received in that day by His own voice. 
11 Wherefore, never think that by your faith you bring about miracles in Jesus’ name. This is too much to ask. Never so puff yourselves. You may say that by your faith the matter in you, responding to imperatives it received in the first day of creation, is quickened by the Spirit and, working together for your good, a miracle takes place. Yea, you would not be caught up in the pride of your heart if you so speak. For the same is very true. Miracles follow them that believe and are an effect of the believing, and the acting in faith. 
12 Yea, this is the key by which miracles are wrought. And behold, this is also the power by which we can all be made one people. For, are we not made of the same stuff? Wherefore, esteem not yourselves higher than anything created. For, you cannot be esteemed so, being made of the same stuff. Yea, the earth and rocks are living, and your body contains nothing not found in them. And the plants are living, and your body contains nothing not found in them. And the animals are living, and your body contains nothing not found in them. Yea, look at the sky and take in the good air. Do not think that there is ought in your body different than what is in that good air. And look into the night sky and find something in your body that is not found in the stars, the moon and the sun. Nay, you cannot. For, we are all made of the same stuff. Yea, we are all relations. Wherefore, marvel not that miracles follow them that believe, unless you believe that the creation was not a miracle. 
13 And I know that you think no such thing. For your faith is an ensample to all people, and the miracles that other peoples marvel at, for they happen but once in a while, are common place among the Nem. Wherefore, I know that you are accustomed to miracles in your lives. But it is still good that you should understand the workings of faith as they apply to the matter which makes up the creation. 
14 And behold, this is the very power by which the miracle has come upon me and upon my brethren which allows us to tarry and to be of some usefulness to the Lord, even unto the day of His coming in power and glory to finish His work. Yea, it is by this working of the matter unto miracles that we are translated. For, it is true that we will not taste of death until He comes. And even then, we shall be changed in a twinkling of an eye, so that we will not taste of death in the way of other men. But, I say unto you, It is because of the workings of faith upon the matter of our creation that we live from day to day. And it is because of this substance that we are renewed each day. 
15 And there are but few in the history of mankind that have received of this blessing. The first was Enoch, that prophet of old. And he was translated with his whole people. And what great faith did they exercise that caused the matter of their bodies to renew itself each day? And how was this great miracle accomplished? Behold, they did live all things in common, even as you do. But that is not all. They did also seek the face of their Creator continually, and they did rely every day upon the revelation of God to guide them. Yea, they did live in the Spirit at all times and in all seasons. And behold, the Lord took the whole city into His presence. 
16 As also John, the beloved apostle of Christ, even that apostle who leaned upon His breast, and was beloved of Him, so changed that he shall not die by the shaft of death, but is renewed each day. And in the end, when he has accomplished all that the Lord shall command him to do, he too shall be changed. Yea, his corruptible that has been put aside for a season, shall he take back up again, but he shall not suffer death as do other men. Rather, that which he takes back up shall be quickly changed, his corruptible into incorruptible. 
17 Now, is not this a miracle? That a man or woman may live and be renewed each day? For it is true that all men will die by the shaft of death. Yea, even for me and for my brethren, we shall taste of death when the Lord sees in His wisdom that our work is done. Yea, in that moment we too shall die, but we will be changed in the twinkling of an eye. But unto some it is given to live long in the grace of God, and be not cut down by the destroying Angel to the same degree as others. Yea, unto some, because of their faith, is given the renewing of their bodies. 
18 And this blessing and gift is available to all the saints who wish it. But, I say unto you, There are many miracles and gifts of the Spirit to which it would be better for you to aspire. For behold, in many ways, the miracle of the translation of the body is a very great burden. Yea, it is a great burden to them who receive it. It comforts me to know that only they whom the Lord chooses for this calling will receive the miracle. 
19 But behold, all other gifts, though they also be burdensome, are not so burdensome as the power given unto me and my brethren. But pray for the gifts befitting your callings and your stewardships. Yea, be humble before the Lord, and beseech Him to bless you with all things that you can bear. For, He knows your capacity and will bless you abundantly. 
20 But it is a needful thing for the saints to understand that in the moment they act in faith, and a miracle takes place, it is not by any power or ability in them that the miracle is performed. Yea, it is the movement of faith upon the matter which makes up all creation. All things work together for the good of them who exercise great faith. 
21 For again, all matter remembers the first day of its creation, and the day in which it was brought into being and quickened. And when that faith is exercised, the matter does bend itself to the fulfillment of all that the Lord does command of it. And that knowledge that is instilled into all matter in the moment great faith is exercised is sealed upon the matter by the Holy Ghost. Wherefore, the matter cannot deny it, for the knowledge becomes part of its own creation. It is because of this truth that all things work for the good of them that exercise great faith. 
22 For, faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. If it is substance, then it is commanded in its actions just as all matter in creation is commanded. Now, all things that are created exercise faith sufficient to fulfill the measure of their creation, except man. Yea, consider the birds, the trees, indeed all living things and discern which of them makes a law unto itself. Nay, they do all that they are commanded to do. Wherefore, even the grain of mustard, though it be the smallest of seeds, becomes a tree sufficient for the birds to nest in. Is this not great faith? I say unto you, It is faith that could move mountains. 
23 But unto man is given freedom to choose. Because of this liberty, we are free to choose not to fulfill the full measure of our creation, for there is much evil in the world. And because of this freedom, there is suffering. For, with choice comes action, and all action causes consequences. Wherefore, when we act upon matter, it is moved to and fro. But matter is not static. When it is moved out of its place, it in turn moves other matter out of its place. And that matter is made to move and cause other matter to move. But the universe is one eternal round and all movement returns unto its own. Wherefore, there is a law in the universe that restores all things into a state of stability and equilibrium. 
24 Now, when movement takes place, or in other words, when there is an action in one direction, either for good or evil, all matter is made to move in that direction until it returns again to a state of equilibrium. This is according to the commandment given unto matter. 
25 Wherefore, if a man chooses to do evil, the matter does not end with the choice and the action. Do you see how any action creates in its own sphere a disturbance in the universe? This disturbance continues beyond the actions of that one decision. Yea, it continues outward and affects all things created. And behold, when it returns again, it may have been magnified into a much greater evil. 
26 Who among you has not seen this magnification? Look unto the Nephites of the Land Southward and the great evil that became of just a few men and their evil acts. Yea, the whole face of the land was laid waste, most especially in the northern most reaches of the Land Southward. Yea, there is not one place in that part of the land that has not been altered. Let this remind you of the consequences of your actions at all times. 
27 And behold, the same applies when a man chooses to do good, for the same law operates in the case of good as it does in the case of evil. What you apply in this universe, be it good or evil, returns unto you. And if evil is multiplied in the application of the universal law, so then is good. Let your actions for good go out into the cosmos and return unto you so magnified that not one particle of your matter is left unaltered. 
28 Now, this law has greatest effect when the motion caused is greatest. Wherefore, the Lord has commanded all of His children to seek an understanding of the Law of Sacrifice. For, it is by and through this law that the most significant change is made upon the matter of mortal man. 
29 Yea, for with all sacrifice comes a crying out of the soul. And this crying out, or distress of the soul, causes the greatest movement of the spiritual matter of the universe. But this matter exercises faith according to that universal law of which we have spoken. Now, when this matter returns, it seeks faith with which to cause equilibrium. And behold, all matter is imbued with this intelligence. If it returns to the point of sorrow and finds there sorrow still, it will use that faith to return unto its own and the consequence will be more sorrow and greater. For this cause does suffering bring about greater suffering if left unmodified. 
30 But behold, if the matter returns and finds in the place of suffering great acts and utterances of faith, this is that which it utilizes to bring about equilibrium. This faith is magnified and edified such that great miracles take place. Wherefore are we commanded to sacrifice, that through our suffering, a better creation comes into being. 
31 For this cause is the purification of the Ammonites recommended unto you. Yea, and for this cause was it so highly favored and justified of the Lord. Which of you, having placed yourself in the suffering of this purification, can say that you returned from it without a miraculous intervention? 
32 It is for this cause also that fasting, study, meditation and prayer are so highly recommended unto you. In fasting a soul suffering is caused. That soul cry moves upon the matter of your body, indeed of your whole soul, as also the matter surrounding you. This matter moves ever outward and affects all matter. But behold, do not think that the matter will move away from you continually, for the universe cannot be described as an ever expanding line, but as a sphere. Nay, that movement will return to you. But when it returns, it will do so seeking faith with which to create an equilibrium. The matter is satisfied in this search when it encounters your study, meditation and prayer. Upon these acts and utterances of faith is all its magnified movement bent, and out of it comes wonders, signs and miracles. 
33 For this cause has it been said that signs follow them that believe. Yea, wonders, signs and miracles are the natural consequence of doing good continually. For behold, there is much temptation to move always within the nature of man and this natural man moves always to satisfy his own lusts. But when the natural man is put away, and when it becomes natural to do good continually, then does the cycle change and then do wonders occur. 
34 Do you marvel that the Lord requires certain sacrifices at your hands? Yea, He requires a broken heart and a contrite spirit. This is the acceptable sacrifice unto Him. Wherefore, the broken heart is the soul suffering cry which moves upon the universe in a most powerful way. This is the cry which issued out of even the great Christ in the moment He undertook to make a suffering for all living. Yea, in that moment of greatest suffering, even He cried out that the cup might be taken from Him. 
35 But behold, His spirit was contrite. For, did He not also say: Nevertheless, not my will be done. Yea, His soul suffering caused the greatest movement of matter since the world was created. And the elements obeyed His will then, even as they do now, even as they always will obey His voice. But, in accordance with that great law wherewith He did command it in the beginning, all matter does move outward upon the world, and does return again to the origin of its movement. And when it did return, the moving, expanding, magnifying matter found the greatest act and utterance of faith since its own creation. 
36 Behold, I say unto you, The sign that followed, and the wonder, is the atonement of all the lives. How great a miracle occurred that day not many of us may discern. But a great change came over the world in that instant. For, at that moment, He took upon Himself all things. Yea, in that moment, we became sealed unto Him with all matter, if we but choose to follow Him. 
37 Now, it stands outside of all question that our soul cry is ever less potent than His was at that moment. But, this understanding does not signify that our suffering does not affect the universe in the same way, albeit to lesser degree. For this cause, He does command us to obey the Law of Sacrifice. For, by living that law, we do avail ourselves of the great power of faith to create the substance of miracles. 
38 Wherefore, obedience to the commandments of the Lord does sometimes bring about hardship. For, He would have a tested and a tried people. Yea, the Lord has sometimes sorely tested whole nations in this manner. For such hardship brings about a certain measure of this soul suffering, albeit by compulsion. And they, who respond to this hardship with renewed faith, bring upon the nation, so tested and so tried, the blessings of heaven. 
39 Yea, Hagoth, your father, when he came away from the land of his inheritance into the Land Northward, did he not sacrifice all he had and all that he knew to come into a wilderness of uncertainty and suffering? But, being moved upon by the Spirit to take up such suffering, he did as he was commanded. Now, who of you can look upon this city and this temple, and declare that the consequences to him and his people were not miraculous? And who can compare the great turmoil in the Land Southward, indeed, the entire destruction of everything there, to the blessed state of the Nem when the Lord visited you here in the fastness of the mountains? Nay, you need not look far to witness the application of these laws. 
40 For the Law of Obedience gives cause to men that they might be drawn outside their own carnal needs and desires; howbeit, this is often accomplished through sacrifice and hardship. But, being thus caused to move, they may either wallow in self-pity, or they may move outward as all matter does move. They may step out and act in faith, setting in motion the Law of Restoration that is connected with faith. Do you see why the Law of Obedience and the Law of Sacrifice were the first of the great spiritual laws taught unto our first parents? 
41 But there are laws that go far beyond the usual capacity of man to obey. For, in some instances, the Lord does require of us that we go against general laws He has given unto the matter of our natural bodies. 
42 We are given, for ensample, strong desires and emotions that draw men and women together. And this is a needful thing. Yea, Adam and Eve were commanded to multiply and replenish the earth, and in order to accomplish this great work, the Lord did command our matter that it might create in us the need, the drive and the desire to fulfill this mission. And so great is the command that our matter fulfill this mission and obey this commandment, that for us only age and infirmity are sufficient to quench the fire of it. 
43 Nevertheless, the Lord does command that we turn this matter in the direction He has commanded. And in this it seems that we are commanded to act against our very flesh. Yea, we are commanded to obey the Law of Chastity. But behold, when we live this law, we are blessed with greater happiness, and also greater power to overcome the flesh. 


CHAPTER 5 
1 Now, Timothy did teach us many things, and the hundredth part of the things he taught cannot be written, for they would fill many books. And behold, many of the things he taught us he did command that I should not write, for they are not appropriate for this record. Nevertheless, I did faithfully make an account of all the things he taught us and I did write those things in this small record, which he commanded me to write. For, I did receive a witness that they would prove to be a great blessing unto my descendents in latter days. 
2 And it seems to me, because the Spirit did manifest the needfulness of these things, that I should record them in a book and that they should pass down to my descendents. It may be that in some later generation my descendents may have lost somewhat the doctrines and the covenants and the counsels of the temple. For, the things that Timothy commanded me to write all seem to pertain to the ordinances and covenants of the High Place. Wherefore, oh my children, give heed unto these things. For, I believe that they will be unto you as a restoration of things lost. Yea, read these things and receive them unto your salvation. 
3 And this Timothy was the brother of Nephi and of Lehi, who was also known as Mathonihah. And these three were among those whom the Lord called His apostles in the Land Southward. But this is not all. Behold, when He asked those whom He had called to this holy calling, He asked each of them the desires of their hearts. And most of the apostles declared that when they finished their work and left this existence, their desire was to come quickly unto the Lord in His kingdom. And behold, this was a righteous desire and the Lord was pleased. 
4 But there were three who stood aside and did not declare their desire openly as the others did. They were Nephi, the prophet, and his brothers, Lehi who was also called Mathonihah, and Timothy. And when the Lord saw them, He did perceive the desires of their hearts and called them more blessed. And behold, He did grant that they should tarry until He came again in His glory, and until the purposes of the Father were accomplished in Him. These same three have been called “the Three” by this people ever since. And they shall neither taste of death, nor of suffering, save it be for the sins of the world. 
5 And now I return to my account of the teachings of Timothy, one of the Three. 
6 And when Timothy had finished speaking concerning the workings of faith and sacrifice, he went with us to the temple and up to the High Place. And, as we undertook to participate in the ordinances of that place, he did teach more completely the meaning of each of the points of doctrine and the principles of the temple. Wherefore, we spent a day in this instruction and yet we did not complete all the work. And behold, he stayed with us for another day in the temple, but we did not complete the work that day either because of the great instruction that he gave concerning the covenants and the principles and ordinances thereof. And we did spend yet another day and did complete the work. 
7 And behold, the Spirit wrought upon us a mighty sensation. And we did inquire as to why such a thing should be. For, we had received the ordinances of the High Place even from the mouth of the Lord Jesus Christ. And His words had been passed down even from my father, Oug, who received them directly from the Savior. And we had not strayed from the original doctrine, wherefore, why should we feel the Spirit so compellingly in this instant? Why should this teaching be any different, or rather, why should we feel any differently from this teaching than we had from the teachings of the prophet? 
8 And Timothy did answer our entreaty with these words: 
9 Behold, the Holy Ghost has but two purposes. One of them is to more fully instruct your minds that you may have a more complete understanding of the word of God. In this way, He does magnify your spirit, imprinting upon you the very gospel of peace. Verily, He does testify to you of the truthfulness of all things, and He does bring all things to your remembrance. 
10 The other purpose is to cause all truth to become part of you. In other words, all things become part of you and your creation. The Holy Ghost is the Holy Spirit of Promise, and it is by this Spirit that you may be sealed up unto Christ and become His. Verily, verily, I say unto you, Lest you be sealed unto Christ, when heaven and earth pass away, so shall you also pass away and be not found in this New and Everlasting Covenant. 
11 But when this Holy Spirit of Promise exercises His function upon you, when heaven and earth pass away, yet shall you remain, for, you have become Christ’s. This is the sealing power. It is for this reason that you come up unto the High Place to make covenants with your God. Verily, there is no other reason for you to walk these halls, if it is not to come into the presence of your Lord. 
12 Now, consider what these sayings mean. If the Holy Spirit of Promise does perform His duty unto you who have proven faithful unto the Lord, then a mighty change must come over you. For, now you must be prepared even in the body to stand in the presence of other instructors. Yea, should it be needful in the Lord's sight that you should stand in the presence of exalted beings, your body must be changed. For behold, without such change, and you come into the presence of an exalted being, your very element would melt away and you would not stand in the body, but your spirit would rush swiftly into that portion of the paradise of God mete for it, and your mortal probation would come to a sudden end. 
13 But, if the purpose of your standing in the presence of such beings is to be instructed, then the Holy Spirit of Promise shall have sealed you up unto Christ. Wherefore, fear not. For, your body, though such a change may be imperceptible to you, yet a change shall surely have taken place such that you may do the things the Lord shall require of you. In that moment, you shall have been introduced into the Terrestrial World, even as Adam and Eve were so introduced. Even though you remain in this corruptible form, yet shall your corruptible have been made somewhat less corruptible. Yea, you shall stand even in the presence of such beings and be instructed of them, for this is the purpose of the High Place. 
14 Now, you inquire of me how it is that you have felt a greater, or more sure word of prophecy from my words and my teachings. Behold, so shall it be for all who do not shun prophecy and revelation. Yea, thus shall it be for all who approach the Lord with that sacrifice that He calls mete, even a heart broken, and a spirit humbled by sacrifice. Yea, and thus shall it be for all who obey the words and commandments they receive of Jesus Christ. For, it is in the nature of covenants and covenant making that, when you are true and faithful, Jesus shall bless you with the intent and purpose of your heart. And what can your intention be in coming into this Holy Place, but to come also into His presence? 
15 Wherefore, the Spirit has moved more fully upon your hearts only because you have taken the time to stay longer upon the words of Christ than you have been accustomed to. Yea, I have instructed you more fully in the understanding of the covenants of the High Place. And you have rejoiced with me in them now for three days. Wherefore, the Spirit does comfort your bodies and your souls with greater power because of your greater understanding. This you should remember and always remember to do. Stay upon the words of Christ and ponder fully the covenants you make in this Holy Place. For, if you do, you shall surely receive a more sure word of prophecy, and Christ shall make His abode with you. 
16 And behold, when Jesus makes His abode with you, He will bring you upon the Way and you shall verily have converse with your fathers, perhaps even daily. And is this not the thing which you most desire? I say unto you, It ought to be. Wherefore, if any come among you and criticize you for the much time you spend in performing the ordinances of the High Place, take no note of him. 
17 Now, I would speak to you more concerning the work that you shall do in the High Place. For, it is a place for men and women to prepare to see the face of their Savior. Yea, it is a place of living sacrifice; for, the living do make a sacrifice mete in His eyes. 
18 But this is not all. You shall also come up to the High Place after that you have made your living sacrifice. Yea, you shall come again and make the same covenants many times throughout your lives. For, even though you have made them before for yourselves, every time you come again and offer up the same sacrifice, you do it for and in behalf of all those with whom you have to do. In other words, you may assist they who came before you, who in their own day were unable to make the covenants you make, to come also into the presence of Jesus and to be more fully instructed of Him. For behold, they are in you. Wherefore, you may make an oblation for them by proxy. 
19 For behold, in the day of their probation they may not have known of the Christ. Consider how many are the generations of man wherein no gospel was preached. Do you suppose that a loving God would leave His children succorless? Or do you suppose that He would make an atonement for all, but leave them no way in which they might avail themselves of that atonement. Nay, believe it not. 
20 Come up to the High Place and participate in the ordinances thereof, for and in behalf of your kindred who had no such opportunity. Give no thought to how you might know who they may be, simply act in the spirit of humble sacrifice and allow the effects of the faithful oblation to have effect for them who made it possible for you to come into the world at this time. Or do you suppose that you have been withheld unto this time when the ordinances of the High Place are had among the children of men for no other purpose than to save you alone? Nay, I say unto you that you may not be saved in the Kingdom of God, in any time that the ordinances of the High Place are had among the children of men, without that you exert yourselves in also providing for them an opportunity to repent of any wickedness in them, and to make sacred covenants that are bound by the sacrifice of the broken heart and contrite spirit that you do freely offer up for them and in their behalf. Verily, this sacrifice shall be sealed unto them by the Holy Spirit of Promise because of your faithful service for them. 
21 Is this a hard thing to understand? That you should be allowed to act in the name of another and offer a sacrifice that is justified by the Lord? Is it hard for you to understand that you may become Saviors in Mount Zion? I do not suggest that you may do the thing which the Great Christ did when He offered up a sacrifice for all. But I do suggest and admonish you that you may yet do like unto Him, for and in behalf of your kindred dead. 
22 Do this work in this Holy Place. But, I also admonish you, do not allow this place to become a place of dead worship and sacrifice. If it so be that the more part of your work here is for the dead, then you must begin again in the spirit of true instruction. Do not allow the work for the dead to overshadow the preparation of the living. For, if they who are living fail to seek the face of Christ, preferring to serve wholly for the purpose of saving the dead, then a living spirit of sacrifice is not conveyed in the ordinance. Do not suppose that any of your kindred dead will be interested in such vanity. Nay, the spirit of living sacrifice must be in your heart for it to be conveyed to them who might benefit from it, both living and dead. 
23 Ponder these things in your hearts. For, verily I say unto you, The day shall come when your descendents shall go up to the High Place and offer up oblation unto the Lord for and in behalf of the dead, just as I hope you shall do hereafter, but they shall stay not upon the words of peace. Nay, they shall take no time at all in instruction and in pondering. Behold, they shall be like cattle in the stall, performing only that which is necessary and in the shortest time. Behold, they might just as well have stayed at home in their beds. For, their kindred dead shall take no interest in such self-service. 
24 Yea, I say they shall serve themselves and take pride in their service. They shall stand up and praise themselves for the great and glorious work they are doing in the name of the Lord. 
25 Behold, in those days, a great curse shall be upon the people. Yea, they shall think themselves blessed above all the people of the earth. They shall advertise their worthiness to each other in words and in tokens, and they shall broadcast their righteousness to all the world and stand them up a light on a hill for all to look upon. 
26 Yet, I say unto you, and I would that you should remember my words for they shall all come to pass, that they shall be cursed above all people. For, where they could have enjoyed the instruction of Angels, and even the very presence of God, in the day that they take pride in their service, their oblations shall become empty, and their ordinances shall become vanity. They shall shun the instruction of Angels and they shall persecute those few who have such visitations. 
27 And is this not a curse unto them who could have been blessed above all blessing? Consider my words and ponder them in your hearts. For, I would not that you should make a mockery of the ordinances and covenants of the High Place. 
28 And after this wise did Timothy instruct us. 


CHAPTER 6 
1 Now, we do esteem the words of Timothy to be of great worth, for he was one of the Three unto whom the Lord gave power over death. And He told us that these same Three would have much to do with the restoration of His gospel unto our posterity in latter days. Wherefore, I have recorded their names for the remembrance of the people, and also so that they may be added to those names which we celebrate in the cold months of the year. Yea, we do celebrate their names and their doings with the stories of the heroes of our people. 
2 Yea, the Lord has foretold of a time when the truth shall have been restored by the mouth of His prophet, but the restoration of that truth shall have been disturbed and shall begin to falter. As also He has spoken to us of a time far in the future when our own descendents shall have become ignorant of many of their own grandfathers, as also of their ways and customs. Yea, and also He has prophesied of a time to come when even His own church and the shepherds of it shall have become a great stumbling block to the righteous. Wherefore, it is wisdom, I think, to record the names of they who will do a great work in restoring all things unto our own descendents. 
3 And, again, the names of the Three unto whom He gave power over death, to tarry until He comes again, are Nephi, Mathonihah and Timothy, the sons of Nephi. And Nephi called his son Nephi to honor that great prophet and father of our people. And he named another son Mathonihah by the word and will of God, the which he had received by the mouth of an Angel. And he named yet another son by that same name, even Timothy. And this he also did because of the word and will of the Lord. For Nephi was a prophet of God and he did walk and talk with God, and with His Angels, upon the Way. 
4 Now, this seems important to me. For, Mathonihah means “honored of God,” and Timothy means “gift of God.” Howbeit, I believe that Nephi received of the Lord insight into the callings of his sons and he named them according to that vision of their future work that was given him of Heaven. For, his son Nephi was that great prophet unto whom the Lord appeared at the Temple in the Land Bountiful when all the face of the land had changed. Lehi Mathonihah was truly honored by the Lord when He made him one of the Three. And can we not say, and who can deny, that the gift given Timothy of God was not a great gift indeed? 
5 And this has become a custom among the Nem – to give names pertaining to their future callings to sons and daughters, even when those names may sound and mean the same. For this reason do many of us now carry more than one name, a thing most uncommon in the past. 
6 Now behold, all my generations, these are the names of the Three as we knew them, and they shall tarry in this world until Christ comes again. And they shall be known by all the peoples of the world by many names, but know that these are the names by which they were known unto us in our sojourn upon this blessed land. Behold, thus speaks the Spirit to me, that in a latter time these names shall become important to those of my posterity that shall wish to return again out of Babylon. Wherefore, I do record them. 
7 And now I return to my account of the words of Timothy unto the Nem of Mentina. For, he did teach us much more concerning the covenants and ordinances of the temple of God, or the High Place, which must be recorded here. And he did teach us, saying: 
8 Now hearken unto my words, ye Nem, and observe to do the things I tell you. For, if you do, I say unto you that you will find the ordinances of the temple shall wax great in your minds and shall take up much of your thought. Yea, and your motive and intent shall be filled with service to your fellow man and you shall become great in wisdom and in the working of miracles. 
9 But give thought also to these things and ponder them. Many shall ask: 
10 Why, if the Lord made a greater sacrifice than I can make, when He atoned for all living, am I required to make what little sacrifice I can in this life? I say unto you that it is because of the great effect that sacrifice has upon the development of your soul. It is certain that neither you nor I may ever be able to make as great a sacrifice as He did. Nay, nor can we ever hope to be able to atone for sin as He did, nor bring together all the lives of men and women into one life. But we may bring our own life together with His, and this must be considered a great thing for us, even a great atonement. 
11 Now I would speak unto you concerning the Law of Chastity. When we consider all the covenants of the temple, it must be remembered that this one is presented in two places: First, when Mother and Father covenanted to share their work, and second, when our first parents covenanted to do the same. For the man is not without the woman, neither the woman without the man in the Lord. He would have us all covenant with each other in the same manner in which both our heavenly and our earthly parents did from the beginning. 
12 For we have been given a gift that is only possessed by those endowed with the power of creation. Yea, and all living things have also this gift, for it is the gift of our Mother in Heaven, even the power of procreation. By and through this great gift, we are born and have our being. Yea, it is by this gift that all living things are brought into this creation and have the opportunity to receive all the good things of mortality. 
13 Now, to ensure the preservation of race and kind, the Lord has made strong feelings and urges the companions of this great gift. These urges and feelings cause men and women to come together to form meaningful and eternal relationships. 
14 I say unto you, These things must be kept under strict control. Yea, they must be kept within the bounds that the Lord has set. Observe that, in the temple we are instructed that Pa Elowe covenanted with Shi-Elowe, and He covenanted with Her, and they became Elohim. So must we all do if we would make our relationships eternal. I would have you also observe that Shi-Elowe did not covenant with Pa Enits Elowe, or many First Women, but He did covenant with Pa Elowe, and she did give Him a new name, even Elohim, which being interpreted means, “They are One.” 
15 We are not so sundered from the Jerusalem of our past, nor from that spoken tongue that our fathers, Lehi and Nephi, spoke that the structure and form of the name, Elohim, escapes our understanding. For, it is the same in our tongue today as it was anciently – the name of a woman and one denoting more than one person. Now, from the relation of the temple, we learn that this did not denote more than one wife, for, when this was done by men without the direct command of God, great evil came upon the people. 
16 Consider with me the consequences of taking that which God has given and applying it outside the bounds which He has set. When men take unto themselves many wives, simply because they are able, they cause an isolation to develop between them and other men. They strengthen themselves, or so they suppose, by the weakness created in others. They raise up a generation devoted to them by blood, but not by love. 
17 And what of they who are deprived of that wholeness that comes of the relationship of wife and husband? They are driven into excesses and then into unnatural love. 
18 Let me tell you of a small group of Nem, far in the north, who have taken to living upon the ice and snow. They have made the wolves of the forests into their servants and have calmed and tamed them to do work for them. Yea, and these beasts live with them in their villages and carry their burdens and pull cargo from one place to another on sledges. And this is a great blessing unto the people, because these animals eat much the same food as the people and there is no necessity of growing provender for them, as with our cattle. 
19 Now, it is the nature of these beasts that only the greatest of the males that unite with the greatest of the females. Yea, and as strange as this may sound, all the rest of the pack, as they are called among the Nem of the North Country, refrain from bearing young. This is according to the commandment given unto them of the Creator. 
20 But the Nem of the North Country have discovered a strange thing among these beasts. When their population grows too great, the males take up 
unnatural ways, each acting upon other males, attempting to procreate upon them. This drives the pack apart and causes the pack to separate into two or many. And this is according to a natural law provided by the Creator. 
21 Now, this may sound unseemly to be spoken of in these surroundings, but I deem it of great use to you and to your posterity. For there will come times when the love of man shall become thin and his heart shall fail him. And many shall ponder why it is that men shall turn unto men and women unto unnatural love. Let the wisdom of the natural world be a guide to you in this thing. For, it is for this cause that the Lord has made certain that a like tale is set in the telling of the High Place. 
22 Recall that, when the strong men had taken up all the women to be wives unto them, and this because they were strong, the weaker and younger men separated themselves and were unhappy. Then did Satan enter into their hearts and instructed them according to the laws of nature, only corrupting the laws for his own purposes. And the men did exercise the natural law of strength over weakness and did engage in unnatural desires upon the weaker of their fellows. The result was that their bodies became weakened and disease did run rampant among them. Then they did rise up against the strong men, who were few, and destroyed them, taking their wives unto themselves and enslaving their children. 
23 I declare unto you that evil shall be the result each time that men corrupt the right ways of the Lord. 
24 Recall also that Satan attempted to justify these acts by using the natural world as an ensample. Verily, he was rebuked and abashed, and so shall you be if you attempt such justification of evil acts. 
25 Now, as a matter of clarification and so that you will not have any cause to be confused in this; for I perceive that some few of you do ponder upon these things and wonder why it is that we find in the scriptures that the Lord did sometimes command certain men to take more than one wife. 
26 Hearken to my words, for thus saith the Lord in this thing. When the Lord God sees fit in His wisdom, He having all things before Him and knowing the end from the beginning, to call upon men to act in this manner, it is for a certain purpose in Him. Behold, it is a special dispensation, or setting aside of the law for that purpose only and not for a general commandment unto the children of men. 
27 And know also, even you unto whom this commandment or special dispensation may fall, that you shall make your covenant with her with whom you hope to work eternally. For, now you are called Pa Elowe and Shi-Elowe. But you must become Elohim, even as our Heavenly Parents did become one in the creation. Else, there is no purpose in your existence in this world, and your creation becomes a thing of naught. I say unto you, This should not be! For you are the sons and daughters of God! 
28 Wherefore, it is commanded of all men and of all women to become like unto their parents. Therefore, you men of the Nem, you chose out and love but one woman to make her a help meet for you. And you women of the Nem, you chose out and love but one man to make him a help meet for you. And you two combined in your hearts and in your intentions become joined together forever, if you seek the sealing power of the Holy Spirit of Promise, which is the Holy Ghost. Then your covenant becomes Christ’s, and anything that He owns becomes eternal. Wherefore, your covenant is bound in the eternities with a cord that cannot be broken. 
29 So also were Adam and Eve commanded to do, and so shall you do. For, do we not walk in the very footsteps of our earthly parents? Are we not each one of us stepping on the very stones upon which Adam and Eve tread? Do we not consider ourselves respectively, Adam and Eve, when we are in the temple? 
30 Wherefore, I ask you, was Adam instructed to enter into a covenant with Eve or with many women. Was Eve not the Mother of All Living, or was she but one in many? Yea, I ask you to ponder seriously these things. 
31 Now, this all pertains to that first covenant by which our Heavenly Parents became Elohim. For, when Pa Elowe undertook to take of the matter of the deep and make a living thing out of it, behold, she was successful. She gave unto the matter self-knowledge and it did perceive. But did it live in truth? It did not, for it could do nothing but turn and perceive itself. 
32 And Shi-Elowe, in His might and with His powerful will did cause the matter to organize and become bodies. Yea, He made stars and planets and moons. But what did they do thereafter? They had no life in them to do anything. The matter obeyed but could not become quickened, for the quickening is a gift of the Mother only. 
33 It was when the two joined their works together and covenanted one to another to join their works, that the worlds become beings filled with life and with power. And so did all living things become living. 
34 Now, I would have you recall the relation of the temple. Having discovered the impediment that existed when they attempted to create on their own, did the Father go back from whence He came and gather unto Himself many women? He did not. And did the Mother go back from whence She came and gather unto Her many men? I say unto you, Nay. Pay good heed unto the teaching of the temple, for it is the High Place. 
35 For, to a certain point, they had been privileged to create by that power given unto them by their parents. Yea, it is true that, within the limits of the Everlasting Covenant, by which they became powerful to create, they did make worlds and creations. But this was all done unto the building of the glorious creation of their parents. When they undertook to make a creation of their own, they discovered the impediment to singular, or selfish, action. They could not accomplish heavenly works for themselves by themselves, and neither can we. 
36 Behold, there is a law in Heaven that is irrevocable. When we undertake to satisfy our own self, our universe is diminished. When we work to the benefit of others above the satisfaction of our own designs, our own designs become sanctified in us, and our universe expands. This is the great message and meaning of the first covenant of the temple, even the covenant of marriage. 
37 But, when men and women take of the things they are taught by heavenly beings and modify them to serve their own purposes, they cannot expect good to come of it. Behold, evil shall result. It is so for all living things. It was so for our Heavenly Parents, and it shall always be so for us. 
38 Wherefore, when the Lord does command a thing that seems to be against all that which is taught in the scriptures and by the prophets, each of us has a duty to seek the guidance of the Holy Ghost in the matter. For, how know we but what He may be commanding us according to knowledge which He has but which we do not share at the time in which He may command a thing? Does this sound hard? 
39 Consider again the commandment given unto our father Nephi, when he was commanded to kill the wicked Laban. Yea, we must all agree that Laban was a wicked man and that he would have taken Nephi’s life should he have found him drunken in the street. But does individual wickedness justify murder? It does not. 
40 And we must all agree that Laban was guilty of more than simple individual wickedness. For, he would have been the instrument of the dwindling and unbelief of an entire nation. Wherefore, his wickedness is expanded greatly. But, I ask you, did his murder prevent the dwindling and unbelief of the nation? Consider the state of wickedness that now prevails among the children of Nephi in the Land Southward. I ask you who now may consider the outcome of the act to give pause and judge the truth of the matter. Did even his general wickedness justify the murder of Laban, who was among the Elders of Israel? It did not. 
41 What then must we consider, then, when we contemplate the action of Nephi? We must consider only that the Lord's ways are many times not man's ways and that He may, in His greater knowledge, see fit to make a special dispensation of those laws which may seem cut into the stone where we are concerned. Nephi's action was commanded by the Lord and cannot be considered murder only because of that commandment. It is upon the merit of that special dispensation that Nephi was justified and stands guiltless before the Lord. 
42 This did not apply to Abraham and Jacob for they were not commanded by the Lord to take more than one wife. Once they knew of the ordinances of the High Place, they repented, made a new covenant with the Lord, and received a new name from the Lord. 
43 You may find, from time to time, that the Lord, for His great purposes, seems to command one thing to one generation and other things to another. This is in seeming only. He does give certain special dispensations unto some individuals which He does not give unto others. Be very careful in the manner in which you do judge the workings of the Lord. 
44 Thus saith the Lord unto this generation: The man and the woman who conjoin themselves together in marriage, making an holy covenant one with another, and to no other, and seek the sealing of their contract by that Holy Spirit of Promise, shall be bound together by the acceptance of that covenant which is conveyed unto Him by the Holy Ghost, and that by virtue of that atonement which the Lord made for all living, for time and for all eternity, and shall become Elohim in the eyes of all living. The man shall become sealed to the woman, the woman to the man, only because of this law and this atonement. 
45 Anything more or less than this comes of sin, for the Lord may command otherwise for His eternal purposes. But He has promised that He shall reveal all His secrets unto His servants the prophets, and that all men and women may receive a confirmation of them by and through the power of the Holy Ghost. Let none among the Nem seek to change this law and this commandment, for great shall be the illness and the wickedness of that generation that seeks to circumvent or change the commandments of God. 
46 Wherefore is it rightly the first of the covenants presented unto us in the relation of the High Place concerning our Heavenly Parents. Therefore is it rightly the first of the great covenants which we must consider if we would become like unto them. And related unto this first covenant is the Law of Chastity. And it is because of this great relationship that the one law has with the other that we are requested to receive the Law of Chastity by covenant also. 
47 And this covenant is, if you are a man, that you swear with an oath binding on earth and in heaven that you will have no sexual relations with anyone other than the woman with whom you have made a sacred covenant of marriage; and, if you are a woman, that you swear with an oath binding on earth and in heaven,that you will have no sexual relations with anyone other than the man with whom you have made a sacred covenant of marriage. 
48 Now come, reason with me in this matter. In the relation of the High Place, does Adam make this covenant of marriage with any other woman than the Mother of All Living? And does Eve make this covenant with any other man than Adam? 
49 Behold, there shall be some who claim that they did, for they lived a very long time. But I say unto you, This comes of a lack of understanding and a misguided assumption taken from scripture. And it may even be that, in times far sundered, some may make this mistake even from that which they receive through revelation itself. 
50 For, it is as I said: The Lord may make, from time to time, a special dispensation of this law for His own purposes. Some may make of this special dispensation a general law, feeling justified in it because of the Lord's words and commandments unto others. But I say unto you, This mistaken understanding shall come in those days only because of the custom which shall also have waxed among the children of men to deny revelation. For, if it were not so, the Holy Ghost would most assuredly assist them in understanding the merits of the general commandments of God and that we must take care in how we apply those things whereby He does move individuals to fulfill His great purposes. 
51 And behold, even the prophets may make this mistake if they are not careful in submitting all things to the confirmation of the Holy Ghost. For many there are, and many there shall be, who shall receive part of the word and will of the Lord and believe that what they have received constitutes the entirety. Even I, who have received of the Lord power over death, must submit all things to the confirmation of the Holy Ghost. 
52 Let us reason, therefore, together. Even though Father Abraham was not justified in the taking of more than one wife, the Lord in his infinite wisdom did raise up powerful nations and leaders among those nations? In this the Lord did fulfill his promises unto Abraham. 
53 Behold, I would exhort you, take now this knowledge and this consideration and subject it to the confirmation of the Holy Ghost. I would ask you to request of the Holy Ghost even a vision of Father Abraham as he is today, and tell me what you see. Do you see him alone or in the arms of his eternal companion? Or do you see him in one day with one wife and in another in the arms of other women? And in the eternities, how does he divide his days and his affections? 
54 I say unto you, If you have the Spirit of Revelation in you, yea, if you can claim that gift of the Spirit, then you will declare unto me the same as that which that same Spirit has shown unto me. Yea, you shall not deny that Father Abraham now resides in the bosom of eternity and is become Elohim with the wife of his bosom, even that same woman with whom he made a covenant bound by the Holy Spirit of Promise. And you shall declare unto me that the covenant that they made one to another is owned by the Lord and has become His own covenant where they are concerned. Wherefore, heaven and earth may pass away, but that covenant shall remain, because it is His own covenant pertaining unto them. 
55 Now, this Law of Chastity bears upon all people, young and old, married and not married. Yea, it applies unto all as a general commandment. Wherefore, teach your little ones from the time they are able to understand your voice that they must obey this law and make it part of the practice of their lives. 
56 For, if they do, when the time comes for them to make an holy and binding covenant of marriage, it shall not be strange to them. Yea, and if they do, the blessings of heaven shall rain down upon them, and they shall not be burdened with those diseases that follow them that obey not this commandment. Yea, and their posterity shall remain strong in the body and also in the faith. And their descendents shall be found whole in the last days and free of the deformities that are consequent in the generations of those who corrupt this law. 
57 Now, if the generations of they who keep and obey this law shall be free of such infirmity that follows them that disobey it, shall this not be considered a great blessing unto them who keep it? By contrast, shall they unto whom these infirmities fall, in consequence of the corruption of this covenant, not be called cursed? And how the heart breaks in the breast of they who are given the vision and revelation of all that shall befall the generations of them who fail to keep this commandment and who corrupt this law! 
58 For behold, even as is observed in the beasts whose generations become too close in relationship and whose strength and vigor are lost because of such mismanagement, the generations of those who corrupt this law shall be cursed with weakness in the organs of the body and in the regulation of their movement, as also in the disruption of the functioning of their limbs. And these weaknesses shall carry down in the generations until the body shall be rejected by the spirit of he who shall have been made ready to come into this life and enjoy the blessings of it. And, though that spirit shall go into another body, as shall be prepared by the way of all living, how great shall be the breaking of the hearts of those women unto whom such spirits ought to have come in the first place because of the sins of their ancestors. 
59 Wherefore, the Lord has decreed it unto all creation: Unto they who circumvent or corrupt this law shall come hardship, pestilence and a diminishing of the seeds. And their generations shall suffer because of them. And also unto that nation which dwindles in unbelief, such that this law shall be done away among them and forgotten, they shall also dwindle in power and might because of disease. 
60 For, the Lord has set natural laws to govern the functioning of the bodies He has given us. And behold, any time we seek to circumvent those laws, we bring upon ourselves and our nation the natural results of disobedience to those laws. And the natural result shall be a desolating scourge among the generations of them that do corrupt the right ways of the Lord. 
61 Of a truth I say unto all you who are blessed with the gift of sight, and who may look at your generations upon the Way, you shall see a day when one in two shall fall by the shaft of death well before their appointed time. And this shall be because the nation shall have forgotten these eternal truths, and they shall have trampled beneath their feet the commandments of God. Behold, let no one think that they may break the laws of God and not feel the weight of their actions, not only in the judgments of a just God unto themselves, but also by the natural results of their actions unto their generations. 
62 Wherefore, even in a very real and carnal sense, we do become Saviors unto our generations. For, do they not rely upon us in this matter? Wherefore, set your hearts upon them who must come after us, ye Nem. Yea, turn your hearts unto your generations. For behold, in the last days, the Lord will ask our children to turn their hearts unto us. Let us consider their day and turn our hearts even unto them also. 


CHAPTER 7 
1 Behold, I have taught you to turn your heart unto the children, and if you do this, you shall be greatly blessed. But you must also turn your hearts one to another. And, in this, I perceive that the Nem shall be an ensample unto all the world. For, you do follow the admonition the Lord gave you when He visited you after His resurrection. 
2 And this is a doctrine that is very clear to you and not confusing. But behold, it shall be a matter of great confusion unto your descendents, and they shall spend much time and energy experimenting upon the precepts and principles that they learn from you. 
3 Indeed, most of them shall be sundered from their own people by blood and by culture. Yea, they shall be part one people and part another, and the blood of Israel, as also the blood of the Gentiles shall flow through them. They shall be a remnant of all people who shall dwell upon the face of the earth. Wherefore, their confusion in many things shall be great and they will call upon your wisdom, or rather that wisdom which you have seen fit to record and set down for them. 
4 And your experiences shall be an ensample unto them insomuch that they will have much which they might use in experimenting upon the words of Christ that they cannot find in their own time and in their own customs. Therefore, see to it that much is written unto them about the Law of Consecration as you do live it, for the manner in which the Nem do live this great law is approved of the Lord. 
5 But behold, looking forward into your generations, communities will be formed without regard to the welfare of its members. Each person shall think to own their property and any who do not must become the tenant of one who does. And also each person who has substance and uses it to produce or manufacture more substance, shall employ those who have not to do their bidding, and shall pay them what they think such labor is worth. But they shall not impart unto they who have less than they need from out of their great store, but will enslave them because of their lack of substance, and through their need to make a living. 
6 Yea, as difficult as it may seem for any who now lives among the Nem, a time will come in this fair place when the poor shall be in bondage to the rich for their very subsistence, and the rich will feel perfectly justified in such a state of affairs, yea, and even extol the virtues of such a system. 
7 Do not be confused. Their wise men shall stand up and teach them and instruct them in the importance of rising above such bondage, and they will suggest many means by which they may do it. But none of their suggestions will have any resemblance to the manner in which the Nem do live the Law of Consecration. 
8 For, they shall teach the poor that they must wear out their lives in serving they who have more than themselves and, setting aside their surplus each year, they will eventually rise out of their poverty and bondage and be free to enter in among the ranks of the rich and have what they have. This they will present as a means by which they may arise out of their state of want and have what they need for more than mere subsistence. 
9 Hearken to my words, ye Nem. For the day comes when even the Shepherds of Israel shall teach this for doctrine from raised platforms before the face of the people. Yea, even they who lay claim to the keys of the priesthood of God shall stand up and teach this false doctrine in the hearing of all people as a means, and really the only means, whereby a poor man may rise out of his poverty. Yea, in this way the very leaders of the people shall teach and support the doctrine that brought upon the Nephites their great destruction. 
10 And what, I ask you, marks the great difference between the people of the Land Southward today and their grandfathers before the coming of the Lord? It is the manner in which they observe to keep His commandments. And do they own each man his property and withhold it from those who are in need? I say unto you, They do not. But they do give freely one to another and there is no want or poverty found in their midst. 
11 Look you to the manner in which the Nem do conduct their business today. When the fishers go out on the great lake to catch fish, do they retain all the catch and sell it for money? They do not, but take unto themselves what they need or desire for the use of their own family and bring the surplus into the marketplace and the people take of the catch freely. 
12 And when the potter makes his wares, does he retain all in order that he might sell it and take the spoil thereof? He does not. He takes for his own needs and the needs of his family. The remainder he brings into the marketplace and the people take of it according to their needs. And, if it so be that one potter cannot produce enough for all to have pots, then he does train up another to work with him. And in this way are the needs of all the community provided for. 
13 Now, when one region contains a product that cannot be had in another, the communities in that area do produce the product for they who cannot, and they exchange that product for something they cannot produce. In this way do the communities of the Nem sustain and support each other in the same manner in which individuals sustain and support their neighbors. 
14 And behold, I look forward in your generations and I see men and women joining their substance together in order to purchase property and gain the ownership of the land, and all it produces, unto themselves. For, such is the state and degree of Babylon in their days. But I see great hardship in this system. For, they do begin to dispute the worthiness of their neighbors to live in such a system and to enjoy the community ownership. 
15 The earth is the Lord's. Yea, it is His footstool. Can you or I own any of it? Can the people of Mentina, this great city, own the land and all the blessings the Lord does proffer because of it? I say unto you, Nay. In all this we may become stewards only of that which is rightfully the Lord's property. As stewards, we have a responsibility to provide for the needs of as many of our neighbors as our stewardship will support, in addition to our own needs. This is our surplus, and our great blessing of the Lord. We labor according to our strength and our ability to provide for ourselves. And we also labor for more that we might have wherewith to share with our neighbors who might need. This surplus is also the gift of God and part of our stewardship. In this, we take good advantage of all wherewith the Lord does prosper us, not wishing to dishonor the Lord in His great desire to provide for all that we need. 
16 And this great desire to prosper us in all things is reflected even in the ordinances of the High Place. For, the Lord does ask us all to receive the Law of Consecration by covenant. And what is this law? It is that each of you covenant to dedicate all with which the Lord has blessed you, all with which He does now bless you, and even all with which He has promised that He will yet bless you, to the building up of Zion. 
17 Does this mean that we must wear out our lives in laboring to build our homes, our workshops and our orchards and our fields and our flocks, only to give them into the hands of another? It does not. The Lord asks us to dedicate our substance, even all that wherewith He has prospered us. Yea, and He asks us to take up the task of being the steward of all these things. And, if we have the Spirit of God in us, then we will be instructed of the Holy Ghost in the proper way in which to dispense the blessings we have received of the Lord. 
18 I say we, assuming myself to be Nem, for I do also so labor, and I do dedicate the product of my labor in the same manner in which the Nem do. Wherefore, I feel part of a great community of Saints who do shoulder each other's burden and lift up the hands that hang down. And I have been blessed that I shall not have need of much of that which you need to sustain your lives. Even so, I do labor with my might to produce a surplus, in order that someone less fortunate than I may receive a blessing from the Lord at my hands. Wherefore, if I, who have little need of provender, for I have been blessed and relieved of such need, do work to provide for the support of my fellow man, and I do esteem such labor worthy and expect to receive a blessing by it, how much the more ought you to do the same who have greater need of such blessings than I? 
19 And behold, it is easy for you to look about you and see the blessings that come of such a system, for you live it in its fullness. But behold, I say unto you, There shall come a time when your own descendents shall not know how to live this law. Yea, they shall be convinced that they must covenant to keep it, but they shall neither have any understanding of it, nor shall they have much opportunity to live it. They shall pay but a meager portion of their surplus to the church for its upkeep and shall be taught to neglect the greater law. In that generation there shall be a dearth of the light of truth and knowledge that ought to prevail and the people shall languish in a form of darkness not of their making and of a character and kind they shall find themselves almost powerless to either recognize or overcome. 
20 Yea, and I declare unto you that there shall be some few who feel moved upon to attempt to live the higher law. They shall be persecuted and cast out from among the people. Yea, you may believe it! 
21 Wherefore, write in a book all the ways in which you do observe to keep the Law of Consecration in your towns and in your villages. For there will be many unto whom the light of restoration does begin to shine in the last days who shall look unto you for an ensign in this matter. 
22 Yea, and there shall be some particularly from among the descendents of Hagoth who, reading these records, shall make an attempt to live this law in its fullness after the very manner which you do observe to live it. And their efforts shall bring about Zion in every place wherein they do congregate. 
23 Yea, I prophesy unto you that your descendents shall awaken to the truth of the covenants they make in Holy Places and they shall gather in many places and form communities that shall set aside the teachings of the world. They shall come out of Babylon and shall turn the desecrated land of their forefathers into a beautiful garden with every delightsome herb. 
24 Their husbandmen shall work for the good of their potters. And their potters shall work for the good of their fishers. And the fishers shall work for the good of their weavers. And their weavers shall work for the good of them among them who work in timber and in stone. And they all shall work for the good of the widow and the fatherless. All this shall they do in a time when such things shall bring upon them the wrath of the shepherds of the church and the onus of their neighbors. Wherefore, their consecration shall be consecration indeed, and they shall do it at their peril. 
25 Nevertheless, though they lose much of what the world esteems as valuable, they shall be added upon in virtue, in righteousness, in blessing and prosperity, and in the gifts of the Spirit. They shall be blessed and prospered when their neighbors shall fall by the wayside for want of bread. And even they shall take up their burdens and bring in among them they who ridiculed them and persecuted them for their strange belief. 
26 Nay! Do not wonder! For in the day that the Lord shall move upon the hearts of your descendents to begin again that restoration which He shall have commenced among the Gentiles, which restoration shall have faltered because of the unbelief of the Gentiles, the understanding of the consecration shall have been so corrupted as to fit itself neatly into the doctrines and the teachings of men. Wherefore, when your descendents do make an attempt to restore the things which you now enjoy, they shall be esteemed as evildoers and shall be driven from the halls of the church. 
27 And even they shall be prevented from going up into the Lord's Holy House because they think to receive a revelation from God concerning the covenants of that sacred place, but it shall be contrary to the teaching of the shepherds of their day. How strange this must sound to you, but I say unto you, Such shall be the trials of the righteous in the last days. 
28 How wondrous and strange it is that they who would truly labor to live completely the Law of Consecration shall be they upon whom fall the condemnation of they who claim the oracles of God. Woe unto the shepherds of Zion in that day. For, the persecution of the Saints shall not be covered nor erased because that they do it in the capacity of apostles and prophets. 
29 Believe me when I tell you that they shall have the Law of the Tithe in that day, but the more part of the people shall shun the Law of Consecration. How absurd this must sound, and how far from sound reason, I must admit. Nevertheless, thus shall be the state of affairs in the church in the day that the Lord moves upon the hearts of the remnant of your descendents left in the land. 
30 And behold! Because of this Law of the Tithe, which shall be the concentration of the people, the Lord shall fully tithe His people Zion. Yea, one in ten shall abide the day, but they that are left shall be those who shall have exercised to live the Law of Consecration. Behold, all others shall consider themselves the servants of the Lord, but He shall turn His face from them for a season and shall give the kingdom up unto the administration of them who shall have been driven and persecuted for their integrity in following His counsel above the counsels of the world. 
31 Now, the things I say unto you concerning the Law of Consecration should in no wise dissuade you from offering a tithe of your surplus to the church for its support. For, the Law of the Tithe is an ancient law and is also ordained of God. But it is not the Law of Consecration, whereby the Lord has ordained that His people should bare each other's burdens, but it is a law by which they who have the church but no communities do sustain and uphold the body of Christ and His work. But where Zion is established among the children of men, the Law of Consecration shall also be established such that there shall be no need for the Law of the Tithe to support the church. 
32 Know this, oh House of Israel! When the Law of the Tithe shall be esteemed greater and more praiseworthy than the removal of Zion from the bondage of Babylon, it shall be a sign unto you that all is not well. But, in that day, men shall cry, “Peace and Safety! Peace and Safety!” Then speedily shall come the destruction of all they esteem, and all that shall remain to them shall be the books out of which the Remnant of the Lord's House shall teach. Let them repent then of the sin they shall have committed against the gospel and be grafted into Zion and numbered among the remnant left in the land. 


CHAPTER 8 
1 Now behold, no teaching concerning the ordinances of the High Place would be complete without that I instruct you as to the meaning of the Endowment of Power and of the Second Anointing. 
2 The Endowment of Power is called such because of that which it provides to the receiver. It constitutes all of the covenants and ordinances of the temple when taken altogether. Many have said that it consists of all the things that are provided to assist the recipient in passing through the veil into the presence of the Father. But I say unto you that its greater importance comes from that which is taken into the heart and soul of the recipient prior to approaching the veil of heaven. 
3 Again I would ask you to reason with me and consider the meaning of the relation of the High Place all taken together. Are we not instructed in many things pertaining to our past life? And does that not give us that whereby we may take counsel which is above that which is taught by the world? Is this not an Endowment of Power in one sense? 
4 And again, are we not also instructed in the manner in which we may pass through this life without taking upon ourselves the blood and sin of this generation? And does that not give us that whereby we may take counsel which is above that which is taught by the world? 
5 And again, are we not also instructed in the manner in which we may remove the veil from before our eyes and off of our hearts, that we may freely walk into the presence of the Father and receive instruction from Him directly? And does that not give us that whereby we may take counsel which is above that which is taught by the world? 
6 Wherefore, is it not true then that the covenants and ordinances of the High Place have for their motive to provide the means whereby we may take counsel which is not of this world? Indeed, I say unto you, that is the purpose of these holy things. Is that not the journey that our first parents made when they came upon this mortal road? And do we not also place our feet upon that same path? 
7 Now, this is somewhat hard for you to understand; for, are we not mortal, and are we not taught that we do live out our lives here in this Telestial World? But behold, this is our Endowment of Power – to yet live in the Telestial, but have access to that which is Terrestrial. Yea, even as Adam and Eve were introduced into the Terrestrial World while yet in their mortal flesh, so shall we also be introduced into the Terrestrial World. 
8 And behold, is there any part of the relation of the High Place that indicates how that Adam and Eve died before such an introduction could be made? I say unto you that you will find no such utterance. Wherefore, do not believe, nor let the belief take root and grow in you, that mortal beings may not come into the presence of the immortal. 
9 I am one for whom mortality has been suspended. Wherefore, I know more than perhaps you can about translated beings. But I say unto you, I am still mortal in exactly the same sense that you are. I shall taste of death when my Savior does come again, but it shall be but a glimmer of it. Nevertheless, I shall taste of it well enough. And though my body shall tarry until He comes, yet it is Telestial in nature. Even so, I do walk and talk with Angels while yet in this Telestial shell. Behold, I ask you, how do I do it? 
10 This is the Endowment of Power. To walk in the presence of Heavenly Beings is a blessing and an endowment indeed. And it is for this purpose – that men and women might progress in grace and in wisdom, in faith and in virtue to that point of perfection whereby they do overcome the veil in them that does prevent them from entering upon the Way and taking instruction from Angels, from their kindred dead, and also from Jesus Christ – that the works of the High Place are given. Behold, the covenants and ordinances of the High Place are given for no other purpose than to bring the souls of the children of men out of darkness and into the light of truth. And when this is accomplished, they do see visions and dream dreams. They walk with their ancestors and receive instruction of them, and, when they have progressed to that point where they may withstand His presence, even with the Lord of Heaven, even Jesus Christ. 
11 Now, this may not seem difficult for you who have seen the face of your Savior even in your flesh. But, you may believe me that many generations shall not pass away but that the children of men shall find it a hard saying, that they might stand in the very presence of the Savior and be instructed of Him. 
12 But now I would call your attention to the veil of the temple. Why, when we are brought to the veil, is it rolled up and done away? It is because of that which we have received upon the Way that causes the veil within us to be rent from the bottom to the top. For, it is said often and shall be written in another place that it is fitting for some who are below to go up, as also it is fitting for some who are above to come down. 
13 But this may not be accomplished so long as man lives in the Telestial world. It is for this cause that the Lord gave unto Adam and Eve, our first parents, all of these things. He wanted them to be able to return into His presence while yet in the flesh. But behold, the Telestial cannot stand the very presence of God. Wherefore, it was important for the children of men to receive, by their obedience and faith, an endowment that would change their mortality enough to allow them to stand the presence of Heavenly Beings. 
14 Now behold, you must believe that such a thing is possible, and I see that you do believe it. But, I say unto you, There will be many, nay, even the more part of the people in the last days shall be taught that such a thing must wait until after the resurrection. Yea, it shall be taught even unto the elect of God that they may not stand in His presence except that they must die first. And they will shun revelation and despise prophesying because of this thing they shall have been taught by the shepherds of Zion. And, because of this teaching, many shall reject the restoration of the gospel and shall persecute they who do receive such things. 
15 But I say unto you, This is the Endowment of Power – to gain the ability to stand upon the Way and converse with your kindred dead, with Angels, with guides and guardians, and with Jesus Christ Himself. 
16 And this shall be a sign unto all they who might read my words and wonder whether they live in the times of which I speak: They shall stand at the veil of the temple with an assistant standing near unto them that they might be reminded of the things they suppose they must say in order to pass by the sentinels, or so they suppose, that have been set there to guard the way into heaven. And they shall not know who it is that that assistant represents, who stands near to them and whispers into their ears the words which they must speak. 
17 They may think that He is Peter or James or John. They may think that He represents Father Adam. But, I say unto you, They are mistaken in all that they think, unless they realize that the assistant represents Jesus Christ. Now, if the assistant represents Jesus whispering in the ear of Adam, whom you represent at the veil, I ask you to instruct me in this thing. What does such a representation teach us about the veil? What must have occurred in us that might cause that we may stand in the very presence of the resurrected Christ, that He might whisper in our ears words of wisdom? Who is it that presents us at the veil and pleads our case before the Father? Who is it that, after we have said and done all that is required of us, parts the veil and speaks on our behalf? Who also, when the veil is rolled up and the obstacle no longer exists that would separate us from the Father, is it that takes our hand and places it in the hand of Him whose dwelling is the bosom of eternity? 
18 Now, you who might read my words, and I tell you it can only be by the grace and wisdom of God that you shall receive these things, can it be that the temple is a sham? Are the covenants and ordinances performed there mere farce? I say unto you, Nay! 
19 Behold, it is the purpose of the temple to take Telestial beings and teach them in such a manner that they may be introduced into the Terrestrial World while yet in their mortal form. And I declare unto you that a change is verily made in their mortality that allows this to come upon them. And in the Terrestrial World, of which the Way may be said to be a part, they are to be instructed by Angels and Heavenly Messengers, even as Adam and Eve were visited and instructed by messengers of God. And, when they progress in knowledge and truth as Adam and Eve did progress, it is the purpose of the temple to effect such a change in they who go there to take up sacred covenants and perform sacred ordinances that they shall see Jesus Christ, and He shall present them at the veil in order that they might come into the presence of the Father. 
20 That they may do this for themselves, as also for and in behalf of the kindred dead, is a surety. But I declare unto you, as for the purpose and the function of the temple, anything more or less than this comes of the world and not of God. 
21 It is for this cause that Jesus bade us come unto Him. He did not bid us to go unto the wise men of the world and thereby learn enough of Him that we might find ourselves justified in the day of judgment. Nay, He bade us come unto Him. And is this commandment vanity? Shall the Lord Jesus Christ give a commandment and yet shall the thing which He does command remain impossible? I say unto you, Nay. A wickedness must come upon any people who uphold such a doctrine. 
22 And now, the Second Anointing is that ordinance which does prove unto the hearts and the souls of the children of men that the things that I have taught concerning the Endowment of Power are true. For it is that holy and sacred ordinance which is performed only by the Man and the Woman who have been sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise. And behold, they shall know that this sealing has taken place, not because some man has placed hands on them and declared it unto them, as shall be the custom in the latter days, but because that same Spirit shall have manifested the very truth of it unto them. And when this more sure word of prophecy shall have been delivered unto them, nothing may controvert it. They are sealed up unto Christ forever, and though heaven and earth pass away, their covenant one to another shall never pass away, but is eternal. 
23 Now, when all this is done unto them and they have received all the laws by covenant and performed all the ordinances of the High Place, and the Holy Spirit of Promise, which is the Holy Ghost, has made their election sure, they do enter into the most Holy Place in the temple, even the Temple of Eve, and they shall wash and anoint each other in a most sacred manner. And behold, they shall lay their hands upon each other and the Lord shall lay His hands on them and anoint them. 
24 And they shall see Him and speak to Him face to face. And behold, this is because they have received the Endowment of Power through taking upon themselves by covenant the Law of Consecration, the Law of Chastity, the Law of Obedience and Sacrifice and the Law of the Gospel. These things are taken up within the temple by and through the ordinances of the High Place. And they are lived without the temple in their walk and talk and in every part of their lives. 
25 Now, I speak to you about this last ordinance in the temple because it shall have been lost by that time when the Lord shall see fit to cause the record of my words unto you to come forth out of the dust, by way of the gifts of the Spirit and of the Seer that shall be given unto that one from among your descendents whom He shall raise to fulfill this calling in the last days. Yea, there shall be none in the time of his calling that may avail themselves of the ordinances of the temple which shall be had in his day who may lay claim to this Second Anointing. You may believe it, Nem! Such shall be the state of affairs in his day! 
26 But I see that this revelation does cause your countenance to fall and your souls to be filled with sorrow. You may well lament the times in which your descendents must live. But take comfort in the knowledge that it shall be through them that the Lord shall complete and culminate that restoration which is to be commenced and which has been spoken of by the mouths of the prophets since the foundation of the world. Yea, it is because of your righteousness that your generations shall produce a race of people in whom the Lord shall entrust even the establishment of Zion again on earth. 
27 Wherefore, rejoice with great joy today with all your hearts, and let that rejoicing reach forward upon the courses of the stars, that they unto whom this great calling shall come might feel of your love for them. Yea, turn your hearts forward unto the seed of your bodies. For, out of you shall spring a nation such as the world has not seen since the City of Enoch was taken up into the bosom of heaven. Yea, none the like has any man seen since Father Enoch took up his city unto the Lord. Even so shall the fruit of your loins be exalted above all the people of the earth. For, they shall surely establish Zion in their hearts. And, though heaven and earth pass away, they shall stand in the presence of the Savior when He comes again to take up His footstool once again. 
28 And, if your hearts are turned unto them, I declare unto you, they shall surely feel it. And, of a surety you too shall feel their hearts turn unto you, even as you record these things and preserve them. For, think not that you shall not see them in their day. Nay, nor think that they shall not see you as you are. For, they shall walk upon the Way and all things shall be unto them one eternal round. Thus speaks the Spirit unto my soul, and so shall it be. Amen. 


CHAPTER 9 
1 The words of Timothy did stir up the hearts of the people of Mentina to a new dedication to the principles and teachings of the temple and to a more fervent dedication to the teachings of the Lord. For, because that Jesus did visit us after His resurrection, the people sometimes became complacent because of His condescension unto them. But behold, the words of Timothy did renew in us the spirit of grace that had come upon us when Christ did sit with us and talk with us. 
2 Now, I do take seriously the words of Timothy. Wherefore I felt to add unto this record a more clear vision of the manner in which the Nem do live the Law of Consecration. Behold, this is the manner of it: 
3 Each family maintains a plot of ground within the city of Mentina itself. And when a young man and woman engage themselves to each other to be married, the Community Council meets to appoint a place for them. In this we strictly follow the ways and customs of the Ammonites as laid down in the writings of the prophet Shi-Tugo. 
4 On this ground the family of the bride and groom, but more usually the brothers of the groom, labor together to build a house sufficient to meet the needs of the family. Now, this is not always so. For, sometimes the groom has few or no brothers, and in this case the family of the bride, and even the whole community, steps in to build the house. But there has never been an instance where a new bride and groom have had to begin their lives together in a homeless state. 
5 Around about this house, the family sows those plants that are useful for food and which may be grown in sufficient quantity in this manner. Each family is careful to grow more food than is needed by them alone so that there is a surplus of food from their garden. Now, because each family does this, there is always an overabundance of such fresh food in the season thereof, as also of that amount of foodstuffs as may be safely preserved against the day of cold. 
6 Each family also labors in some industry which can be done at home. Some put up garden foods to be used by the community in the day of cold. Others prepare dyes and colors from the same produce. Still others labor to provide seeds for subsequent seasons. Yet others prepare many items of common use from the fibers of the plants. Many concentrate their efforts in producing those plants that are especially needed because they provide medicine for the removal of the causes of disease. 
7 But this is not all. Many families maintain workshops where goods of common use of all kinds are manufactured. These goods range in kind from the smallest and most inconsequential to the largest tools used by the smiths and mechanics. All these goods are consumables used commonly either directly by the families or by those engaged in larger industries. All of our tools are produced by families in the communities. 
8 All of these things are produced by the members of the family, both young and old, depending upon their age and their capacity. And behold, they are not produced for the purpose of getting gain, but are exchanged for goods produced by other families. As there is always a surplus, it is brought to the storehouse and distributed liberally and without constraint unto all those who may need such things. 
9 Now, there are many kinds of foods, the growing of which is not suited for the small family holding. These things are produced on large tracts of land which do surround the city. Such things as grains of all kinds, cattle, and those plants we use for fibers for the making of cloth, especially linens, are grown outside the city. And behold, all the people go out in turns to work that crop which must be worked, or to labor in caring for livestock. All these things are brought into the city in the time of its harvest and are distributed liberally unto all that might have need of them. The surplus is held in storage and is used in trade with other cities and is exchanged for such things as may not be produced here. The surplus goods are traded equally for goods brought in the caravans from other cities of the Nem, as well as other peoples with whom the city of Mentina does hold commerce. In this way, we maintain a constant state of association with all the Nem in all parts of the land, as well as with our brethren in the Land Southward, and with other places in the world. 
10 The Nem of Mentina understand that many people in many places do consider themselves the owners of the land upon which they sojourn, and behold, that is their right, for we would not constrain any person to believe as we do. But, the Nem do not consider themselves the owners of the land, but rather, we are stewards of the Lord's footstool. This has been our way since the inception of our city, yea, even since the first of our people left the settlements of Hagoth and resorted into our place of fastness. And it pleases me to say that, for the most part, all of the Nem both of the mountains and of the plains, as well as the Nem of Corianton, do so consider themselves. 
11 For, how may a man think to own the earth? How may he possess that which is the Lord’s? Will a man rob God? It is not to be considered. Nevertheless, we know that many peoples of the earth have different ideas than ours and we seek to constrain no one in their thought. 
12 But behold, all men and women of the Nem are made equal stewards of the land and no person may dictate to another the stewardship of another. When a family is appointed to steward a holding, their neighbors leave them to it and do not seek to manage what is not their stewardship. If a family neglects their stewardship, the matter is taken up by the Community Council, but no individual ever takes such things upon themselves. But, whereas every family labors diligently for their own support and for the surplus that is to be given unto others, there have been no such cases of neglect, except where there has been incapacity. 
13 Now, the Nem take some pride in the beauty of their city, and this might be considered sin in the eyes of some. But it is true. The city of Mentina is a beautiful place because of the great care with which every family does manage their stewardship, and I can think of no great harm in taking pride in such things. 
14 Now, there are numerous herbs grown by the Nem for food. Many have been brought through trade with our brethren in the Land Southward, such as corn and black rice, beans and other ground nuts for the pot, papas, squash and gourds of all kinds, and all manner of leafy herbs for the pot and to be eaten raw. There are also many kinds of roots and tubers grown for food, such as the onion, garlic, camas, kous, bitter and biscuit, all of which have been taken out of the hills and valleys of our mountain home. 
15 Of grains there are many, including wheat of the plains, ryegrass, millet and quinoa; some of which are brought in from far away places in the south. 
16 Among the most curious of the herbs used as food are the tubers we have acquired in trade with those countries across the Western Sea. There are bitter and pungent roots known as dzigon which burn in the mouth but sooth the belly when eaten raw. Yea, many are the strange herbs and plants which have been brought to us in trade with diverse countries. 
17 The more important of the herbs grown in the small family holdings are those useful as medicine. Wherefore, I shall attempt to make an accounting of the common household medicine, but I shall not approach the larger task of making an account of the many plants used by the Healers, for their medicine is written in another book. 
18 For the defenses of the body and for the cleansing of the blood, the family grows a liberal supply of the spined cone, of yellow man root where much water and some shade is available, and the tree known as arched limb is also grown as a shade tree near the house. There is also a cancerous growth on the dead trees of the mountains that is highly sought and used for defense against such ailments. 
19 To relieve the troubled senses, many small, leafy herbs are grown which have bright and pleasing odors and flavors. These include the spear and the hyssop, as well as the sting and the water fodder. These are used in mild draughts to enliven the soul and to bring about a sense of well-being and of internal pleasure. These can also be useful to treat the headache and to clear the skin of pustules brought on by an excess of rich food. 
20 There is also the root of a small forest plant that is brought in from the Nem of Corianton that is very sweet and is useful for calming the nerves and also in flavoring other foods. It is called groundsweet and is highly sought after. 
21 In the hotter climate of the Land Southward a strange, sword-like plant grows abundantly in the deserts which is very good also to calm the troubled soul. But this is not all; it is also very good for the belly and relieves the troubled stomach. Its name is Aalowe, and this name is believed to have been adopted from the name given to a similar plant that our forefathers knew of in the land of Father Lehi's origin. 
22 These are but a few of the common medicines used by the household in treating common complaints of the nerves and of the spirit. They were never rendered or ground too much, the mothers believing that too much alteration of the natural form harms the effectiveness of the medicine. 
23 Now, there were also medicines to cleanse the inner sea and the blood, and they include the very bitter herbs which grow readily upon the hills of the valley. They are the Big Bush, and this is distinguished from a similar looking plant known to many as the white and green rabbit fodder by its potent smell and pungent taste. It is bitter when made into a draught and serves to sweeten the waters. Many of the leafy vegetable plants grown in the family garden are also used for this purpose. But behold, one of the medicines most commonly used to sweeten the water is the very earth. The land around Mentina in many places contains a salty sort of clay that is very useful in sweetening the water and carrying away that which causes putrification in the body. This soil is collected and is added to the soil of the garden where those plants are grown that have similar medicinal action. 
24 For complaints of mothers, a comely flowering plant known as mothers bloom is used. It is most favored among women because it is gentle and yet very effective for relieving disquiet of the birth bed and its functions. It is also useful in bringing on childbirth safely. There is also a tuberous plant know as chumrah or eeyah that is brought in from far in the Land Southward and is very sweet. It is a pulpy plant often used as food, but is very good in controlling disquiet of the birth bed. 
25 For complaints of fathers, a noisome smelling berry is used that can only be grown close to the sea in the Land Southward. It is called palma, and it is believed that this name also comes from times before our fathers came to this land. A beautiful flowering shrub, the root of which is also useful in father's complaints and in restriction of flow, has been grown with great success in the gardens of Mentina, in spite of the fact that it comes from far across the sea. 
26 To aid the wind, especially in the day of cold, the families of the Nem grow the fury leaf, fury staff and they also gather the seeds of the big bush. All of these are used in sacred smoke and do relieve restriction of wind because of the thickening of the wetness of the lungs. The small feather leaf is also used to relieve pain and irritation of the throat and also to bring down fever when of long and undesirable duration. Some families also use the spiny local plant called clears the wind, which is gathered and used in draughts. 
27 For the belly and elimination, the bark of a tree known to the Nem in the north has proven very effective and it is one of the medicines for which we trade our fine flaxen cloth with the communities in that part of the country. This dried bark is made into draughts and taken before retiring. This usually brings elimination upon waking. The Aalowe is also used for this purpose. These medicines are rarely needed, however, because of the custom of most of our people of eating foods that they grow themselves and of not relying upon much grinding and rendering in the preparation of food. 
28 For ailments of the skin, the Nem use plants and soils that serve to take away wetness and bring tone to the structure of the skin. They also bathe in the hot water springs that are so numerous in the valley. 
29 The Nem of Mentina do not suffer much from ailments of the liver or of the kidneys. We believe that this is because of the quality and variety of the plants we use as food. Many of these plants are bitter and serve to cleanse and bring tone back to these organs without the need of additional medicine. 
30 And behold, there are numerous other plants, minerals and even animal medicines that are used by the Nem of Mentina, and they are grown in abundance in the gardens of the family holdings. But also the Healers dedicate other space for the cultivation of herbs more specifically used in medicine. It is because of this diversity of medicinal plants, minerals and animal products that we believe that we are less stricken with the ailments that are common among other peoples. 
31 But I would not that you should think that we rely overmuch upon our knowledge in the healing of our bodies. For, many are the gifts of the Spirit and we do esteem that the gift of healing is both the gift to heal through knowledge and the gift to be healed. And our healers are people with such gifts. 
32 Behold, there are those whose gifts allow them to place their hands upon the stricken part of a sufferer's body and the part is healed by the power that is in them. And there are those whose gifts include a combination of the knowledge of plants and other healing substances with this same power to heal by the laying on of hands. 
33 And still others have a gift for laboring with the workings of the body, returning it to the point before the person was stricken with sickness. This gift is especially useful in the case of accident and where healing from them is slowed because of pain and debility. 
34 Some there are among the women of our communities whose gifts have only to do with assisting in the bearing of young, both among our women as also among the females of our beasts. These women provide a great service to our people and they are highly reverenced for this gift that they receive of the Lord and that they are willing to pass on to others. 
35 And there are some who have a kind of sight that allows them to see into the body and the illness of a person and direct the hands of others. This combination of gifts has proven invaluable to the Nem. Indeed, many have come from diverse places in the world simply to learn of our Healers of all gifts, most especially of those who have this sight. 
36 It is curious to me that the gifts of the Spirit find their home in certain people. Some are healers and some are scholars. Some are artisans and find inspiration beyond that of others to the beautifying of our lives. Yea, I have often times pondered upon these gifts. But I say unto you, The gift that comes to women, to assist in childbirth, is one that I find curious indeed. For, I perceive that very few men ever receive of this healing gift in the same measure as women. Perhaps it is because no man can ever know what it is that women feel in giving birth or perhaps it is a special gift given of Mother in Heaven. I cannot say. 
37 And there is another gift that is had by certain few among our communities. Yea, it is a gift that is to be desired by all. It is the gift to discern that portion of the knowledge of other peoples that is most useful to the Nem. For behold, there are many peoples in the world and all have learned somewhat of the things that promote the health of the body. We do send out messengers unto all people and they do return with knowledge derived from foreign lands. It can be difficult at times to decide which of this knowledge is useful and applicable to our way of life. The Holy Ghost speaks to us of truth but does often leave the application unto us. In this sense, they who have the gift of discernment render a labor whose value cannot be estimated. 
38 It is enough to say that we do not judge the gifts of the Spirit. One is no greater than the other and all are given so that we may aid and succor one another. But the gifts of healing are among those to which we all most aspire. For, that which wells up in the heart when one sees that another who was sick will not die, but will live on to serve the Lord and his neighbor, is a sensation that fills and completes the soul. 
39 Now, for the Nem of Mentina, medicines constitute a great portion of that which we trade with other cities. For, many of the plants we use are not available here and still others are only available here. Wherefore, we do trade much for medicines and foods that are unique to other areas. These things are not purchased, but are traded liberally and freely. And it is our custom to study the medicine and food of other peoples with whom we come into contact, for thus we have been commanded to do by our God and King. 
40 Wherefore, we do consider our medicine as part of the observance of our religion. And in this we feel that we do please our God. For, as often as we send emissaries into other lands to learn their medicines, they do also teach the people of those lands somewhat of our religion also. Wherefore, we do constantly receive visitors from those lands and peoples with whom we engage in trade and commerce, who do come even unto Mentina to learn more about the covenants and ordinances of the High Place. 
41 Now, fish we have in abundance in the lake upon the shores of which our city is built. But behold, they are not large fish. Nevertheless, these small fishes are dried and beaten into a meal for use in many kinds of food. So much of this meal is produced, and so popular is it, that we do engage in much trade of it also. And it is traded for the skins of the great cattle that dwell upon the plains. These are very popular and beautiful and they are used in many kinds of useful things. 
42 Yea, the very floors of my own home are covered with these skins and they do greatly increase the warmth and comfort of the whole house. Yea, so desirable were they to me that I did labor vigorously in bringing in the fish and the drying of them and the grinding of them that I might provide an excess of the meal. And with this excess, the Council did trade for many, many skins with which the people did cover the floors of our houses. And this was a great pleasure for me. For, as the keeper of the records of my people, I do not often have opportunity to produce the kind of surplus that is useful for trade. Wherefore, in this did I also gain the pleasure of offering all my surplus for the good and comfort of my community. 
43 Now, I include these things in my accounting of the manner in which we do live the Law of Consecration in order that my posterity might gain a more clear view of the manner in which we live. For, it does occur to me that some might think that we live an austere life with little comfort. But one may see that the Lord does greatly prosper us as a city and as a people because of our strict adherence to the laws and commandments which He has given us. Yea, we are drawn continually to give thanks unto the Lord for the way in which we have been blessed and prospered. And we do attribute this great happiness to our observance of the commandments of God. 


CHAPTER 10 
1 Now behold, many of the Nem heard the admonition that Timothy gave us when he admonished us to write about our own use of the Law of Consecration and they winked at it. For, it seemed curious to them that we should dedicate room on the plates, which are made of metal and there is not much of it, to matters that seem rather unconnected with the religion of Mentina. 
2 But, as for me, I deem it of great importance. For, the religion of the people ought to have to do with all those things that we do that bring us unto Christ. And I deem it wisdom in Timothy that he should admonish us to write these things. For, the Lord gives no commandments unto the children of men but that He does not also wish them to obey and thereby gain the benefit of the things He does command. Wherefore, since He has commanded us to receive unto ourselves this Law of Consecration by covenant, and that most holy, I will follow the admonition of Timothy and write unto my descendents these things that they too may derive some benefit from them also. 
3 Now, from time to time, a traveler comes into our city, or into one of the cities round about, requesting that they be allowed to enter into the law with us and become part of our community. And this is the way that we do admit them into fellowship with us: 
4 Behold, we do examine them as to their understanding of our ways and our customs and if they do know much about us and are willing to be one with us, we do welcome them in and assign space for them. If they know little about us, we do ask them to stay in one of the hostels that are provided for those who come to visit the temple and we do take much time and care with them to be very sure that they know us and our ways before they make any commitment as to how they will live. When we are satisfied that they know us and our ways sufficiently to know whether they can live as we live or not, we do welcome them in and assign a place for them. 
5 Now, the place that is assigned for them depends largely upon that function they wish to fill as members of our communities. For behold, if the man or woman wishes to be artisans in baskets, it is not good that they build a home close up unto the mountain because of that they will have need of much travel to and from their home in order to gather and prepare the reeds. Therefore, it would be better for them to build their home close unto the lake where the reeds are plentiful. And this is an ensample of the thought that is taken for each family holding within our cities. 
6 And when the family has been assigned their place within our community, they are taken to the temple and an ordinance of adoption is performed for them in the sight of the community. And this is the manner of the ordinance: 
7 The individual is taken by the right hand in the right hand of the Peli who performs the ceremony. And they raise their hands together in the sight of the people. And the Peli proclaims the person's name in a loud voice and also that the person is now kin of our kin and flesh of our flesh, for we are all relations. After they have done this, the two of them go down into the font and the person is baptized as a token of the covenant of the making of family. When the person comes up out of the font, all the people embrace. 
8 And when the person is thus introduced into the family of the Nem, the people whose homes are nearby to the place which has been assigned come together to assist the new member of the family to build a home. And this is done in the same manner as when a young man and woman are first married. Yea, we all join together in building a new home and a new holding for the new member of the Nem. And, when the home is completed, all the people come to celebrate it and they bring gifts from their own homes to help the new one settle in. 
9 Now, sometimes a new person comes into our communities who has much substance and this was once the subject of some debate in the councils. It was believed by some that such a one ought to give all that they have into the storehouse and then receive back again sufficient for their needs. But I disagreed with this practice, for, on the one part, it judges the person harshly and, on the other, it necessitates the placing of one person as steward over property that once belonged to another. 
10 On the one hand, who may stand in judgment of the worthiness of another? Who can say that the substance brought in by another is filthy lucre? Is it not part of the stewardship that the Lord has given? How then can we judge such a thing? And if the gain of another was won by hard labor, is it right to take that substance from them? 
11 On the other hand, to assign a steward over the storehouse is the usual custom among our people to care for the increase that is offered freely out of the labor of our hands. But to place in the storehouse all of another's substance and then give back again that which is deemed sufficient for their needs, is the backwards of the custom of the people. For behold, each person is the steward of their own substance and they offer the surplus of it freely to those who are in need or to the storehouse to be kept back for them that may find a need later. But none are compelled to offer their surplus. It is part of the covenant we have made one to another and also unto the Lord. Wherefore, how can we compel one person for his much substance but not another for his little? And how can we compel one person because he is unknown to us and not all those who are our friends and neighbors? 
12 Yea, we did debate these things for a long time and the Council did finally come to a decision with the help of the Spirit of God in us. Verily, it was decided that each person ought to be the steward of all that the Lord does see fit to bestow. Yea, and each person should labor to have a surplus, but also to be the steward of that surplus, remaining ever watchful that when the needy come for assistance that he give what assistance he may. And when there is a surplus for which special needs exist, then that surplus ought to be given to the storehouse. 
13 But behold, no one is to judge another for their substance or their offerings. And in this thing, the Council deemed that there would be much greater peace in the communities and in all the land. 
14 And again, from time to time, there arose disputations because that one person or another failed to live the Law of Consecration as another thought it ought to be lived. These were kept to a minimum because of the constant teaching of the principles and ordinances of the High Place. And indeed, it was difficult to imagine much contention about such things. For, the people were in such accord that there was seldom much disagreement. 
15 But now and then there arises someone in the community that refuses to labor for their own support, but becomes dependent upon the labors of their neighbors and take advantage of them. Now, these are not they who are sick or halt or blind or in any way are unable to labor. But they are they who see how easy it might become to live upon the labors of others. These are always brought before the Community Council and chastened. And if they do repent and take up again some useful purpose, all is forgotten. But if they refuse, or they repent the moment and return to their sloth, they are brought once again before the Council and they are chastened. 
16 And if the person repents not and does refuse to return to some useful purpose, then assistance to them is curtailed. They must rely upon the charity of their neighbors. And, if it so be that they have taken such advantage of their neighbors that there exists bad will between them, they do usually move away from them. Then they are treated as neighbors and all the people trade with them, for, in trade we do assume that they have become once again fruitful, wherefore we do trade with them. But they no longer receive of the surplus. 
17 Now, this may seem harsh, but, how may one live solely off the labor of another if he be of good body and right mind? And if he be of sound body and his mind is right, how should he feel to live off the labors of another? Wherefore, let all they who live the Law of Consecration do so with all their heart, for it does establish a Zion on earth. But let him not take the advantage of his neighbor. 
18 Wherefore, our communities grew very rapidly, for there were many people who came into the land to live in peace and harmony with us and learning our ways, desired to be Nem. And as many as did strive for the things that we did strive for were admitted into our communities, and they become one with us. 
19 And from time to time there arise those who do commit grave sin against a neighbor, such that they do take away a person's ability to labor. These are immediately brought before the Community Council to be examined of them. And if the thing be proved with witnesses, that the matter be accidental and without malice or intention, then that person is given the opportunity to make the matter good, if it is possible, pledging for the upkeep of the injured person. And if the burden be not deemed too great, the matter stands corrected, insofar as such things can be corrected. And if it be deemed that the burden be too great, then the sinner is reproved and is assigned to do all that is not too great a burden for the upkeep of the injured one. 
20 If it is found that the matter be intentional and with malice and the malefactor be not repentant and will refuse to pledge for the upkeep of the injured, that person is hastily cast out into the lonely world and a decree advertising the abuse is published in all the land. And that decree shall stand until the person desires to repent and make good his offense. 
21 And behold, if it be found that a person does willfully do an act of murder, rapine or mayhem and it is proven with witnesses and evidence that the act was of no accident and was verily done with intention, then that person is speedily and privily put to death. Behold, this is our law, that any act of murder, rapine or mayhem shall be dealt with in this harsh manner. For, we have seen the destruction of a people because of the secret combinations of the Gadiantons and we wish no such thing to take hold among our people. 
22 But behold, according to the records and remembrances of the people, there has only been two such cases and they involved persons who had come among our people from afar off and had no knowledge of our ways. Yea, they were foreigners from foreign lands where such things are common, but they were not of us. 
23 For behold, we do esteem each one of us equally responsible for the upholding of the laws which have been established by the councils. Likewise, we do esteem each other equally entitled to the benefit that good laws do bring to a people. 
24 Wherefore, if a man steals from his neighbor, he is chastened and must return the thing stolen. And if the stolen article is destroyed or consumed, then he is chastened and must return the value of the thing. When this is done, the matter stands resolved. But if the man steals again or makes a habit of theft, even though it deprive no one of the ability to labor for his upkeep, such that he steals three times, he is cast out from among the people and is no longer entitled to the surplus. But, if he repent and prove himself through diligent service for the space of one year, then is he re-admitted in full fellowship. 
25 But behold, if he return again to his crimes, he is forthwith cast out from among the people and a decree is sent out to all the people of his crimes. 
26 And if a man bear false witness against his neighbor such that he be injured in his good name or his reputation and it be proved with witnesses and evidences, then is the offender brought before the Community Council and the matter is heard. And if the matter be proven, then the man is chastened and, in order to remain in the community, he must make amends for his error and labor to repair the damage he has caused by his false witness. But behold, he is not made to pledge himself for the upkeep of the offended person, for he has not caused the offended to lose the ability to provide for his own family and for the community. But the offender must repent and make amends, else he is cast out from among the people. 
27 Behold, in Mentina, it is sin to do injury or harm unto your neighbor, for, we hold that our way of life depends upon one neighbor serving another. Yea, we labor diligently not only for our own living, but also for the upkeep and happiness of our neighbors. And, if there be any who feel not to participate with us in our ways and our customs, behold, there is none that stands to compel them, but they are welcome to depart and live as they want to. 
28 Yea, and it is true that we are prospered by the Lord in measure greater than that which is enjoyed by the people in the Land Southward. For, were it not so, I can hardly think that so many would come unto us and beg us to admit them into our society. And we do live happily with all people because of our laws, for, we know what is expected of us and we do serve each other. 


CHAPTER 11 
1 Behold, I say again unto those of my descendents who might read these my words, it is wisdom that you should receive them. For, the Spirit has told me, and also I have seen your day in a vision, that even the elect of God shall be confused as to the right and proper way to live up to the laws and covenants they receive in the temple. Wherefore, read these things and learn the ways in which the Nem did them. Howbeit, although I know that there are many ways in which a person who is of good intent may live the commandments of God, yea, the ways of righteousness are as diverse as those of wickedness; nevertheless, I do believe that the blessings that we have received of the Lord do arise out of the manner in which we do live. 
2 Wherefore, I do fulfill the admonition given to me of Timothy and write our ways and customs that you may know of our doing and of our intention. Howbeit, you might find insight into how you might apply the things we have done, that have brought us such happiness, unto the things that you do. And behold, if you do the things of righteousness, you shall receive of the Lord even as we have received of Him. 
3 Now, as I said, I have seen your day and your doing in a vision given me of the Lord and through the Holy Ghost. Wherefore, I know that the intent of the hearts of the men who govern and rule this fair land in your day is not the same as in mine. Yea, in the last days, men shall have forgotten the blessing and the curse that is laid upon this land. They shall forget the covenants of God and they shall begin to follow the dictates of their own hearts. Behold, they shall wrest and twist the commandments of God and they shall forget to acknowledge Him in all things. 
4 And also those who shall think to govern the church, they too shall begin to do so with an eye single to the appeasement of men and not to the pleasing of their Maker. They think that by satisfying men and rulers they will not be troubled by them. Behold, I say unto you, and hearken unto my voice all you who are of my household and do receive these things which I have written unto you, All they who seek the pleasure of men, hoping to appease them, shall be troubled by them all the more. Yea, they shall trouble you in your laws and put you in bondage. They shall trouble you with your children and your hearts shall be broken because of them. They shall trouble you in the streets of your cities on the byways. Yea, they shall come even into your homes, your churches and in your Holy Places to vex and trouble you. All this shall be only because you do esteem them more than you do your God. 
5 And in the day that my writings shall come up unto you out of the dust, there shall be such vexation in this land that some few may be found who look to the past for a pattern and a way whereby they may live more completely the ways of the Lord. Yea, they shall for generations have looked unto their principle men, whom they bethought ought to have led them into righteousness and the ways of the Lord, for that ensign into the right way to keep the commandments and their own covenants in the days in which they live, only to find that they have not been led out of Babylon, but have built up Babylon in their hearts because of their teachings. 
6 Yea, I say some few, and they shall be precious few, shall begin to ponder upon all that they have been taught and to seek a different path than that which their principle men, even the shepherds of Zion, shall have set out for them. For, they shall have been taught from their youth that the only way to heaven is the way the wise men have taught. Behold, this is evil and comes of evil in the hearts of conspiring men. 
7 But there shall be a gathering from out of the church of those who do ponder and pray about these things and seek to do a better thing. Behold, in that day shall the words of my mouth, as also the words of all the Nem who have been moved upon to write unto their descendents, shall ring out in their ears and they will be guided by the Spirit into new ways of experimenting upon the words of Christ and of His gospel. 
8 For, my children, I say unto you with all earnestness, The way onto salvation is by and through that Holy One who made the atonement for us. Yea, belief on His name and faith in Him is the only means whereby we, of this creation and household, may obtain eternal life. Or, I should say, it is the only way we may obtain the New and Everlasting Covenant and become as our Lord and return unto Him and our Heavenly Parents. Without belief and faith in Him who is mighty to save, we must all return unto our own and suffer endlessly the deaths prepared for us. 
9 Wherefore, if it be that you should be among those unto whom the Spirit has spoken and you live in the days that I have seen in the vision, read these things and take them as your model. For, we have been truly blessed of the Lord. Yea, if you be of that gathering of which I did speak, rejoice and look back. Yea! Turn your hearts unto us, your grandfathers, and learn from us how we did keep the statutes of God that you might take of the things you learn from our doing, following that counsel and guidance you receive of the Spirit and build a home and a community, a place of worship and a temple, even in the midst of adversity. Yea, and you shall be a blessed and a happy people. 
10 For, I would say unto you somewhat more about they who do govern the land, as also about they who do think to guide the church, they have forgotten the commandments of God and also their covenants. It shall be unto them just as it has always been unto the children of men when they turn away the face from that holy Way into which the Lord their God does continually try to lead them. They shall become so puffed in their pride that they shall esteem their own ways as the best and fairest ways in all the world. Yea, even they shall say that their ways are the Lord's ways and unless a man follow their words and dismiss all others, he cannot be saved. 
11 This is sin. For, the Lord's ways are those which He does speak into the hearts of men and women when they turn their faces unto Him. And behold, it is true that when He does establish His church among the children of men, He does raise up prophets and seers to guide it. And when they follow Him and seekHis face, they are inspired as to what they ought to do. But behold, in the day that such prophets and seers do esteem their words greater than the words of Christ and do teach the people to listen to their words and to seek not the face of Christ, then have they fallen into Babylon and do sin against the covenants of God. 
12 Behold, they shall have no means whereby they may lead the people into eternal life, for they shall have turned unto Babylon. Wherefore, if the hearts of the people are pure and they are faithful, they shall be saved. But their shepherds shall return unto their own for the great sin they have committed against their God. Fear not for them, for they shall one day see the face of their God again. But it shall only be after they have returned unto their own and not through that atonement made by the Son of God. Yea, it shall be by an eternity, eternities and an eternity that they shall be made ready to once again come into the presence of Him who condescended and sacrificed all so that they might come into the New and Everlasting Covenant of God and become like Him, through the atonement made for them, and through the transforming power of the Holy Ghost. 
13 And again, in the day that you do read these things and you are that little gathering of the Lord's people who would once again seek His face while yet in the flesh, look around you and behold! A man shall build him a house and it shall be a possession unto him, not a stewardship. In this is he cursed. And the wise shall teach him that because his wife shall have a claim upon him, that he shall be responsible for the support of his family, and this is right. But behold, the world shall teach him that he is to be the sole support for the family. And this shall the world use for a pitfall unto the man. For, the rulers of the land shall make the price of bread so high that he, with all his might, will be unable to provide for his family and his wife shall be forced to labor as well. But they shall labor away from the family and the rulers of the land shall take the children and they shall raise them up into bondage even greater than that under the weight of which their parents do labor. 
14 Then shall every person labor away their lives for a tiny piece of land or a house or a conveyance and all shall be impoverished because of their need for property. This is Babylon the Great which shall fall and the fall thereof shall be great. And behold, none shall escape her fall except they shall have gathered out of the world and except they shall have given up the pursuit of her unclean things. 
15 And behold, my children, be awake to these things and let not your eyes be dimmed so that you do not see them when they are ripe before you. For, in the day that the children of men have embraced the way of the world, even Babylon, they cannot approach the Way of God. And their prophets and seers shall be of no use to them in that day for they too shall have taught the ways of the world. In that day there shall not be a single community in the whole face of this fair and blessed land wherein the inhabitants thereof do succor each other as the Nem do succor their neighbor, except for those very few who have come out of Babylon. 
16 But behold, their wise men and their prophets shall have taught this way, even the way of the Gentile, for generations and they shall have been brought up in it themselves. And they shall teach the man that he must labor all his life for the things of the world and for the support of his family. And the day shall come that the family that labors together for their support, and not simply for their greater convenience and entertainment, shall be ridiculed and shunned. That man will be persecuted by the wise and by the shepherds of the flock as one who is not worthy of the things of God because he does teach his children to labor with him in providing the things that they need and in order that they might have somewhat more to give to them that need. 
17 Yea, you shall see them driven from among the people. Yea, even as has been written in another place, because they shall be poor in the eyes of men, albeit they are rich in their own hearts and in the eyes of God, they shall be driven from the churches and the synagogues and they shall not be allowed to worship with the saints. Woe unto such a day! For the saints are become dross and shall find no comfort in their substance. 
18 Yea, in that day the man shall not labor beside the woman, nay, nor beside the child, for his support, but he shall be separated from them all the day. And the mother who must labor because of the price of bread, she too shall not labor beside the child for their support but shall be separated from them all the day. And the child shall be taken into houses set up for their training that they too might be raised up into the ways of Babylon and labor out their lives alone and separate from the ones they love. 
19 And behold, when the man and the woman do come out of Babylon and mend their ways such that the family is once again together in all their labors, the rulers and the prophets shall alike see this as a sign of evil and shall punish them. Yea, they shall be cast out from among the people. And they shall be called negligent and abusers of children. And there shall even be some who shall be cast into prison for that they shall desire above all else to come out of Babylon. And they shall be forced to touch the unclean things again in order to come again into the community. How great shall be the evil of that day! 
20 And yet, there shall be some few who are able to abide the day and begin again to build Zion in their hearts. These shall be most blessed. For the Lord shall raise them up an ensign unto all the nations. And their works shall be works of righteousness. And they shall labor together, the father and the mother, the parents and the children, and they shall begin to build again Zion in their communities. And men and women shall labor again a labor of love and they shall begin to build again Zion in all the land. 
21 And behold, they shall take into their own homes they who have been beaten with stripes and cast out. And, while their neighbors shall shun them, they shall succor them. And they shall take the children of them that have been cast into prison and shall shelter them and teach them to love their parents because they have been abused for their sake. 
22 And fathers shall labor beside mothers, and parents beside their children. And behold, families will be together all the day long laboring for their own good, as also for the good of others. And children shall learn righteousness from their parents. The children shall not idle away their days in worthless learning, yea, they shall not learn to be the thralls of dishonest men and masters, but shall lift up their heads. 
23 In the day of their sore probation, they who do experiment upon the principles of Zion shall not cast out from among their midst any who have not the things the world says they must have. They shall not judge them because of their lack of substance, but shall embrace them and labor with them also, side by side. 
24 But still, they shall be persecuted by some. And after they have been persecuted from among the people because they followed not the dictates and ways of the world, they shall gather together to labor and to live, to worship and to serve and to observe to keep the commandments and covenants of God, following the dictates of their own consciences, as also the guidance of the Holy Ghost. 
25 For the gifts of the Spirit shall be taken from them that should have possessed them in abundance. Yea, the shepherds shall have no more of the visitations of Angels and they shall persecute them that do. And the shepherds of Zion shall have no more of speaking in tongues and translation and shall persecute them that do. And behold, the prophets shall speak no more prophecy and shall cast out them that do. And they shall no longer heal or be healed by the power of God or the gifts of the Spirit and they shall cast in prison them that do. And the blind shall not see and the lame shall not walk. Yea, the widow shall go friendless and lonely and the fatherless shall be idle. And behold, the saints shall be covered in the blood and sin of Babylon. Yea, how the Adversary shall rejoice in the face of him who holds the keys of God in that day! 
26 And the pride of men shall wax gross. Yea, and they shall be cursed above all the people of the earth. For, a vexatious pestilence shall pursue all the families of the earth, but especially in this land. And there shall not be one family in this land, in the day of which I speak, that shall not be vexed with the pestilence. And there shall be a wasting disease and a canker. And the flesh shall fall and the bones shall wither. Surely, the strength of men shall diminish. And this shall come to pass because of the pride of men in the day of which I speak. Yea, because they shall think themselves high, they shall be brought low. But, even with the evidence of the displeasure of God on the right and on the left, even before their faces and following them in their path, the pride of men shall have waxed so great that they shall still declare themselves to be the strongest and most blessed people in all the world. Yea, they shall judge themselves blessed even in the midst of the evidences that God shall heap upon them. And, if the people of that day do not repent, these things must surely come to pass. 
27 And I say unto you, It shall be the thing in which men shall take the most pride wherein they shall see their downfall. Yea, it shall be that thing they think is their greatest strength which shall bring them down into the dust. Yea, that by which they do judge all other men shall be the thing whereby, being judged by it, they shall be cursed and shall sink in the esteem of all the world. 
28 Open up your eyes and look, my children! For, unless you forswear yourselves of the teachings and the principles and the ways of Babylon, then shall you be carried away in this tide that shall overthrow the cities of the mighty and the wisdom of the wise. Yea, unless you follow the commandments of God, you shall fail and perish. But, if you will remember that Christ did teach to come out of Babylon and if you hearken unto His voice, then shall you avoid the calamities of that day. 


CHAPTER 12 
1 And I now say unto you, Because that you have brought your hearts unto the Father, the hearts of the Fathers are brought unto you. Wherefore, you have received these writings and do ponder them in your hearts. I would beseech and admonish you to submit all these things unto the confirmation of the Holy Ghost. And if you do this, your mind will be enlightened and you will receive of Him the truth of the things you do read within them. And behold, if you do read them with good intent, having faith in that One who is mighty to save, then the Holy Ghost will manifest the truth of these records unto you. 
2 Now, I cannot say how this manifestation will come, for, the manifestations and gifts of the Spirit are many and diverse. But you shall know that the things that the Spirit does manifest are true because that to deny them will cause a great confusion in your mind and in your heart. And when the Spirit does manifest the truth of a thing, behold, you will have peace with regard to the matter. Remember, to deny such a thing is to deny the Holy Ghost. Deny not the Holy Ghost, for it is by the power of the Holy Ghost whereby the atonement is made whole and operative within you. And without this power there could be no New and Everlasting Covenant, no, nor atonement, nor righteousness in this creation. For, the covenant our Heavenly Parents made with Christ and with the Holy Ghost makes all things possible in this creation. Wherefore, without the Holy Ghost, our Father which is in Heaven would still be God, as also the Mother. And Jesus would still be the Christ. But what would such things matter to you and me? I say unto you, They would not mean a thing, nay, not one whit. In this covenant we may deny the Father and still be forgiven. Yea, and we may deny the Son and there is forgiveness. But, I say unto you, If you deny the Holy Ghost nothing in this creation matters and you must return unto your own. 
3 Wherefore, it is by the power of the Holy Ghost that you may know the truth of these things, as also the truth of all things. Rely not upon the words of any man, be he living or long dead, as I know that I shall be when you receive these records. And you should not rely upon the words of any person living at the time in which you shall receive them, but upon the Holy Ghost. 
4 For, how shall a man who has not received these things tell you of their worth? He may read them, but if he does not subject all things unto the confirmation of the Holy Ghost, he cannot know the worth of my words. Wherefore, you may not subject these things unto the wisdom of the wise, but unto that still small voice within you. The Holy Ghost is the only test of truth that you may rely upon in the day that you will receive these things. Yet, He is given unto you, wherefore, use this test in all things. For, if you relyupon the wisdom of the wise, you have fallen into a trap. If you cannot receive truth through the Holy Ghost, then you cannot think to be capable of serving God, for you are overcome by the Babylon in your heart. Repent and know God! 
5 Now, I am adamant in these things because I have seen your day and all that you do in it. Yea, it is by this same Holy Ghost that I have walked upon the Way and I have looked and seen you. And behold, the things that I have seen are not so different than those things which we see now and then begin to grow in the hearts of men. But behold, they have not taken hold in our communities, for we labor diligently to prevent it from doing so. But I say unto you, Should the day come, and I perceive that such a day will come unto my people, when we cease to diligently labor to keep such things out of our communities, then the same will befall our happy state and we will also succumb. 
6 I am thankful for the time in which I live, that I may be able to describe unto my descendents the great and blessed state in which we do live because of our strict adherence to the precepts which the Christ did teach us. I am also happy and consider myself blessed that I should be privileged to live in a time when the prophets of God do seek His face and also teach us to do so continuously. 
7 And I do consider the Nem blessed, for, not only do the Nem of Mentina enjoy blessings of prosperity and happiness, but we have also spread across the face of the land and all of our communities do also enjoy all those blessings which makes our lives so happy. 
8 Yea, and we do welcome the many people who continue to leave the Land Southward to join our communities. And behold, from the Land Southward even into the far reaches of the north, there are communities of the Nem. And when one travels over the great mountains into the east, there are communities of the Nem connected to that great city Corianton, and they are our brothers also. They,too, take unto them refugees from the Land Southward and their communities cover the face of the land. And all this in the space of but a few generations from the time Hagoth left the Land Southward. 
9 And we do enjoy commerce with the Land Southward and our brethren there, for they, too, grow and prosper at this time. But behold, their way of living the covenants of the Lord are different than ours and some strife does still arise from time to time which they labor diligently to subdue. And I believe that, if they would but adopt the Nem way of life, such things might be done away. 
10 But behold, lest I fall into the same pride that shall befall the people of this land in times to come, I must repent me of such thoughts. For, who am I to say that the manner in which the Nephites do live the laws of God are lesser or greater than our ways? For, they are also blessed of the Lord. 
11 Notwithstanding, they have all things in common and their property is administrate unto them as the governor sees fit. And if the governor remains strong in the faith, I see no impediment in this. But, if the day comes when the Gadiantons do again possess the land, as they did in times past, this system will not continue to bless the people as ours does. 
12 For behold, our system is governed not by one man, but by all the people and it is administered not as one wise man sees fit, but as the whole community deems necessary. And it is this system that has attracted men and women who have traveled from afar off to learn of us and our ways. 
13 Yea, we have entertained emissaries from over the sea both west and east and they have lived with us and learned of our ways. And behold, they have also taught us of their ways and have established trade routes with us and there is much traffic between our land and theirs. 


CHAPTER 13 
1 And behold, this is the state of affairs in the land of the Nem of Mentina in the days of my stewardship. And the days of my stewardship have been long among my people and I am become old. 
2 And I have delivered up the seat of the High Priest unto the Great Council of Mentina and they have chosen my own son, Shimlei, to sit in the seat in my stead. And he is a righteous man and has assisted me in my work for forty years. Indeed, since he became a man and took to wife the granddaughter of Alma and Sabel of Corianton, he has always been at my side and has been a support and help to me in all the things the Lord has called upon us to do. Yea, he has been a counselor unto me and a great help in my labors. 
3 And now I give my last blessing and warning unto you who are my descendents. Remain faithful unto the statutes of the Lord and remember Him in all that you do. Yea, sing praises unto Him in all things and render up all your pride. Call upon Him in all things and trust only to the administration of the Holy Ghost for a guide to truth. 
4 For, I say again unto you, in the days that these writings shall come unto you out of the dust, there shall be great pride in all the land. And if it be the desire of your hearts to fulfill the commandments of the Lord and come out of Babylon, it shall be difficult for you to discern how you may begin to truly establish Zion in your hearts. But when you read these things and ponder them in your hearts, let the Holy Ghost teach you how that they may become a chart unto you. I know that, if you follow the ways of the Nem, or at least if you use our ways and apply them to your times, you shall be successful. 
5 Now, I bid you farewell. Remember me and all your grandfathers. Our hearts are turned unto you and, behold, if you will seek us, we will manifest ourselves unto you. Howbeit, if it be the Lord's will, we might be guides unto you in seeking the right ways of the Lord. 
6 For, the Spirit has testified to me that you shall build again a Zion in this land and it shall come to pass even as has been foretold. And this same Spirit has shown me in a vision that you shall build a place of peace, a place of safety, a place of understanding and of learning, a place of holiness to the Lord, even a High Place in the tops of the mountains. Wherefore, hearken unto the words of my mouth. 
7 For, the Lord has shown me the tabernacle in the wilderness that you shall build and that it shall be by and through those ordinances that you have received of my father Oug that this little tabernacle shall begin to grow and become a temple unto the Most High God. And the Sons of Levi, even the Peli, shall begin again to purify their hearts after the manner of the Ammonites of old and also in the manner taught by Jesus. And they shall once again begin to offer up a righteous sacrifice unto the Lord ere the end come. 
8 And this shall be a sign unto you that you do live in the time which I have seen and of which I have written unto you. 
9 The Sons of Levi shall build a tabernacle and shall place it in the wilderness, for there shall be no room for living sacrifice in the synagogues and temples in their day. Wherefore they shall build a temple and an altar in the wilderness. And it shall not be in the form of the temple in days of old, but it shall be made of stone that shall not have been cut by hand and of earth and of the covering as if of a tent. This shall be the first of many such tabernacles wherein the people of God shall resort to purify themselves and to prepare themselves to come out of Babylon. 
10 Yea, the altar shall not be of cut stones but of natural stones. And it shall be a depression in the center of the room which shall be a hearth wherein the stones of the first day of creation are laid. And the wall of the room shall not be the height of a man but shall require that a grown man must bow down unto the Lord to enter in the door thereof. And the roof shall be of timbers and twigs, as also of any suitable material that might be found at hand. And there shall be a path leading from the hearth toward a place of fire and this shall be toward the rising of the sun and shall be mounded up with stones. And at the end of the path there shall be a mound of earth upon which natural stones have been set up. But these stones shall not be cut by the hand of man, nor shall any man raise his tool to them, lest they be defiled. For, this is the altar of the temple. 
11 Yea, look and see! For, in the days about which I have spoken, they who are of the house of Levi and of Aaron shall once again build an altar of stones. And behold, it shall be for the purifying of the hearts of men and women unto sacrifice. And it shall appear unlike the great structures and mighty and beautiful buildings of the day. For, in it are the hearts of men and women purified and made ready to meet their God. 
12 And behold, within the room, when you look up upon the roof thereof, you shall see thirteen limbs or beams which shall extend from the wall thereof to a high place in the center. And it shall be bound with seven circlets of joined twigs. And upon these twigs shall smaller twigs be placed as a thatch. And upon this thatch shall earth be thrown up.
13 And between the floor and the roof, there shall be suspended from twelve points a veil which shall have painted upon it the scenes of the creation as taught by my father Oug. This shall hang as a ceiling above the heads of they who will be seated in the room. 
14 And round about the walls of the tabernacle shall be a continuous seat which shall be of thrown mud and hardened. This shall be a place to sit and hear the Book of the High Place. And there shall also be a place upon the floor for to sit which shall encircle the hearth. 
15 And behold, this tabernacle shall be used by that little gathering of people as a place of resort and refuge against the teachings of the world and of Babylon. And they shall teach there the ordinances of the High Place and also they shall purify themselves in that place according to the purification of the Ammonites. 
16 Look for such a place among the people of your day, my children. For, in that day, the Lord will complete and culminate His great work, even His strange work, even the restoration of all things that have been spoken by the mouths of the prophets since the world began. 
17 For, in that little tabernacle, the Lord shall accept the sacraments and the offerings of His people. Yea, a light shall begin to shine forth from the door of the lodge and a light shall fill the whole earth. And when it has filled the whole earth, none shall say: Behold, I am a Nephite or Lamanite or Ishmaelite or Mulekite or Ammonite. But all shall say: Behold, I serve my Lord. Yea, all shall be disciples of Christ. 
18 And the little flock that gathers unto such places as I have described, for you will build them in diverse places, shall begin to have all things in common and shall begin again to build anew a Zion unto the Lord their God. 
19 Rejoice, in that day, my children! For, if you are among they who gather to such curious and unusual places, behold, it is because you have received the things that shall have been delivered unto you out of the dust of the earth from your grandfathers. Yea, rejoice exceedingly, for the coming of your Lord is nigh and you shall see His face!


________________




________________


THE FIRST BOOK OF PA NAT 
THE DAUGHTER OF SHIMLEI 


CHAPTER 1 
1 In the third year of his stewardship as high priest of Mentina, my brother Shigoeth went into the mountains to that place where Samuel was often seen to go when he visited the City of Mentina and where that great prophet resorted while he sojourned with us. And in the place close near unto the place where Samuel was wont to sit and study the books of our history and our scriptures, there is a shelf of rock high above the valley which overlooks the lake and the city. And the place is very high so that anyone who sits on it as Samuel did may look in the direction of the rising sun and see all the cities and settlements of the Nem in the valley of Meninta. 
2 And behold, as he climbed up to the hill, Samuel, he lost his footing and fell a great distance and was broken upon the rocks. And his body was broken, yea, all his limbs went out of their places and, notwithstanding the great skill of our healers, there was none who could save him.
3 And so it came to pass tragically that Shigoeth ended his ministry after only three years in the seat of high priest unto the people of Mentina. But behold, he did serve the high priests of Mentina all the days of his life and his name is revered among us for his wisdom and his humility. 
4 I am Pa Nat and I do now take up the stylus to write for my family. For, Shimlei had but one son and he was the eldest, and it is the custom, or rather it has become the custom, of the people that the eldest son keeps and writes the books of remembrance for the family. And behold, I am not the eldest of my family but I do take up the stylus. And we deem this no dishonor and hold that it is not requisite that only the eldest son keep the records, but it is a custom among the people. 
5 Now, it has also been the custom to appoint a male descendent of Father Hagoth to the seat of high priest unto the City of Mentina. But again, this has not been set into our law, but has become a custom of the people. And when Shigoeth perished upon the place of Samuel, there were many men who could lay claim to an inheritance from Hagoth, even unto the seat of the high priest. But the Council of Mentina did choose rather to call my sister, Nin-Shepa, to the seat of the high priest unto Mentina. Wherefore, she does sit in the seat and counsel the people. 
6 And Nin-Shepa is a prophetess of God and a seer. For she does walk and talk with God upon the Way and she does possess also that gift whereby she may look upon records written in strange tongues and translate them into that which is understandable to us. But this is not all. She does also possess a gift that is most powerful. When moved upon by the Holy Ghost, Nin-Shepa may look upon the vistas of time and foresee what is shortly to come to pass. Wherefore, she has foresight in the Spirit and can see afar off. 
7 And behold, so esteemed is she in her gifts, and also in the holy manner in which she does keep the commandments and statutes and revelations of Jesus, that they did elect her to be the prophetess to the people and high priestess over the city. And behold, she has called upon me to be a clerk unto her, even as my father was clerk unto Manti. 
8 Now, I have found in the records some notable omissions which the Spirit, which is in me when I take up my staff to write, does impress upon me that they should not have been left out of that which ought to be passed on to our descendents.
9 Wherefore, I do begin my work of history, beginning not in my own time but some time ago, when the brethren of Oug went even down unto the Land Southward to preach the gospel unto the people of the land. For, their works and words are important to us who remain in the land of Mentina and their story is told during the winter months when all the works of the heroes of the people are rehearsed in the hearing of the little ones. And, if their history is so important to us in our day, I see not why it should not be as important unto them of our posterity who may wish to do the things we do. 
10 Wherefore, I do begin my record with an abridgement of the works and writings of the mission of the brothers and sister of Oug unto the Nephites of the Land Southward. 
11 Now, Hagmeni, who was the grandfather of Oug, was a great preacher of the word of God and he did travel upon the face of the Land Northward rooting out the Gadiantons and teaching them the word of God and the Gospel of Peace. And he was also a mighty man and a man of great stature. Wherefore, when he discovered a nest of vipers, for so the Gadiantons were called by the people, he did begin to diligently teach them. And when he had taught them the Gospel of Christ, he did straitly command them to covenant with God to lay down their weapons and their cunning plans to destroy the people and the peace of the land, and to become adopted into the family of the Nem. And behold, many there were who were so convinced by the power of his teaching, as also the power of the Holy Ghost in him, that they did do as he commanded them and became covenant Nem through the ancient and sacred law whereby we may take to ourselves and to our families, even those who share no relationship with us. For, we do regard as truth the principle taught by all Nem that we are all relations, being of one family, one heart and one mind. 
12 But behold, there were here and there, viperous men and women who would not listen to the preacher, nay, nor to the Spirit of God in him and they would not make the covenant, but swore in their wrath to take from the Nem all that they possessed and enslave them. Unto these Hagmeni did offer battle and he did slay them with the might with which God had blessed him. 
13 For, Hagmeni was a mighty man and he had been commanded of God to search out the Gadiantons and destroy their evil works. And this conversion he proposed to accomplish either by the might of the Spirit of God or by the might of his own arm, he being supported by the hand of God. And behold, in all his mission, when he found those who would not make the covenant and he was forced by their wickedness and hatred to bring them battle, the Lord did support and sustain him to the extent that he had the victory over all unto whom he did raise the sword. And behold, so notable was his success that the rumor of him went out even so much that many of the Gadiantons did covenant and become adopted into the Nem simply because of the rumor of his coming nigh unto them. 
14 And the sons of Hagmeni were infected with this same spirit and zeal in preaching the word of God unto the Gadiantons, except that they did not often find the need to offer battle, for the Holy Ghost was with them even to the convincing of all people to seek Christ and His Way. And not the least of these great preachers was his son, Sanempet and he was also a prophet of God. 
15 And the sons of Sanempet and of Pah Hem were also mighty men and valiant, and they did also go forth to teach the word of God unto all the people. And they were San, the eldest, and after him came Shigath and Shimnet, who were twins. Then came the daughters of Sanempet and of Pah Hem, whose names were Hempapet, Himneth, and Pa Akim. And behold, in his old age Sanempet and Pah-Hem brought forth Oug, who was chosen to stay behind when his brethren were called to go down unto the more wicked part of the people of the Land Southward to preach the word of God unto them. 
16 And behold, it is the history of their mission unto the people of the Land Southward, yea, even unto the Nephites, their brethren, that I do dedicate this book. 


CHAPTER 2 
1 Now, the story of how the sons of Sanempet went down unto the people of the Land Southward is spoken of somewhat in Oug’s writings, and he does mention in his record that they departed out of Mentina and were heard from now and then for some time. And after the space of time, Oug did not hear word of them again, and this greatly troubled him. But behold, the Lord Jesus, did visit the prophet Oug and console him when He appeared to the people of Mentina. 
2 Now, when they began their journey into the Land Southward, they went not by sea but, going around the great canyons on the east side, they did proceed southward. And behold, they came to a great expanse of desert and rough country. This they knew to be the very southern borders of the Land Northward, and also they knew that, if they continued on this course, they would come into a land of desolation. Wherefore, they did turn more toward the east and continued in this wise for many days. And behold, they came into a place of dense forests and many rivers and exceedingly large lakes, wherefore, they knew that they would soon come unto the eastern sea. 
3 And this was their design, for they wished to come into the Land Southward upon the eastern side. Yea, this was their design because they knew that this side of the mountains which divided the Land Southward was in the main inhabited by the Lamanites. And, whereas the Lamanites were rumored to have not so completely accepted the Gadiantons in that time, they felt the safer by approaching the Nephites from the East Sea. 
4 And after many days travel they did come to the East Sea, which is a great gulf, surrounded on all sides except the east by land. And by and by they came to a city which was called by the people who dwelt in it, Tamahualip. Then did the missionaries pause their progress long enough to acquaint themselves with the people of that city. For, the people of the land were known to the Nem and they made trade with the cities and settlements of the Nem from time to time. And the Tamahu-Ah were known to be people who would not allow the Gadiantons to dwell in their midst. Wherefore, the missionaries paused their journey in that city for a season. 
5 Now, it was while they were in Tamahualip that they found men who would take them down the coast in ships. For, the Tamahu-Ah were fisher folk and made their living by catching fish, and they had many boats and ships for this purpose. Wherefore, the missionaries found transport for themselves along the sea coast and did go around the land called Desolation by that route. And they went up into two ships and embarked upon their journey on the waters of the gulf. 
6 Now, they did not go directly down to the Land Southward, for, the Tamahu-Ah had commerce to attend to as they made their way. Wherefore, their progress was slow, but they learned much about the places and the people of the Land Southward as their hosts made their way slowly upon the waters, stopping here and there to trade and to take up news from the south. 
7 And behold, they learned that in some of the cities of the Land Southward the Gadiantons had taken complete possession of all the cities and that the People of God were often misused and persecuted by them. And, even in those cities that were not completely controlled by them, their wickedness had infected most of the cities in that region. And they learned that the persecution was the worst in the Cities of Laman, Josh, Gad, and Kishkumen, which were all cities on the east side of the land of river Sidon, which bordered the Land of Zarahemla. 
8 Wherefore, when their hosts had brought them as far to the south as they desired to go, even to that point where the land bent again to the east and the gulf closed in again from the south, they took their journey once again upon land in order that they might travel up even to those cities which were known to be the nests and strong places of the Gadiantons. 
9 And when they had come ashore, the three missionaries counseled together. 
10 And San, who was the eldest of the sons of Sanempet , said unto them: 
11 I do not think it wise that we should all go together into these cities, but let us divide one from another and each go into different places to preach the word of God. I will go up into the land round about the City of Laman. Shigath, go you up to the two Cities of Josh and Gad, for they are very close one to another. Shimnet, go up unto the City of Kishkumen. And Himneth, you must go where the Spirit of God shall take you. Now, take care as you go and even when you have arrived in the cities, for, we are to understand that the people are very wicked and may strive against us. But be faithful and the Lord will go before us. 
12 And San laid his hands upon his brethren and his sister and blessed them in the name of Jesus. And when he had done this, they did go their separate ways, promising that they would be diligent in preaching the word of God to all the people. 
13 Now, San went straightway up to the City of Laman, which was up in the mountains. And he observed that the people came out of the city to harvest large nuts and to hunt the wild beasts that infested the jungle surrounding the city. And when the people saw him, standing by a pool of water, they were afraid somewhat because of his appearance. 
14 For behold, the people of Laman had taken the custom of dressing like the Lamanites. That is, they wore very little clothing at all but a loin cloth. Nevertheless, they did paint their bodies with many symbols and marks, so much so that their appearance was very bright and gaudy. 
15 But behold, it was the custom of the Nem to cover up the body with humble and modest attire when they went in the sight of other people. And this was in accordance with the teachings of the High Place. For, God did give to the first man and the first woman, clothing to wear, that they might more fully protect themselves from the sin of adultery and fornication and, in this way, they did remember to more fully observe to keep the law of chastity which they received by covenant in the temple. 
16 And this was the custom of the sons of Sanempet. Yea, and they were each of them Priest of the Temple of Mentina. Wherefore, they did observe to keep all the covenants they had made in the High Place, and also the laws they had received there. And, because of this, the people of the City of Laman were surprised at the appearance of San when they saw him bending down to drink from the pool. 
17 And the harvesters ran back into the city to tell what they had seen in the jungle. For, they believed they had seen an enemy or an apparition. And behold, they did return again with the guards of the gate of the city, and they did approach San with weapons of war. 
18 And San raised up his hands above his head and began to sing a song of praise and thanks unto God. And behold, this did so surprise the men and the guards that they did all stop in their hasty progress toward him to hear the song. 
19 And San did speak to them, saying: 
20 Why do you come out of the city and approach me with weapons of war? Is there war in this place? 
21 And the captain of the guard answered him: 
22 You are a stranger here. Tell us your name and your business. 
23 And San answered him, saying: 
24 Is there war then, that you come out of your strong city with weapons, even against a lone man? 
25 Whereupon, the captain responded: 
26 It is not your business to ask us questions. You are a stranger here. What is your name and your purpose? 
27 I am San , and I come from a place you know not of. I am a messenger. May a messenger not travel in these parts? I ask again, am I in danger of running upon a war. For as you can see, I am unarmed and cannot defend myself. 
28 And the captain put up the sword he had drawn and answered him: 
29 I do see that you carry no weapons such as my men and I do, and you do not look to be a man of war. Nevertheless, you are a man of great stature and you are attired in a strange, Nephitish manner. Therefore, I must assume that you are a servant of the judges of Zarahemla and mean to do us no harm. But behold, it is not our custom that messengers from Zarahemla should come among us by any other means than by the gate of the city and it is unusual that one should tarry outside the city in this manner. What do you mean by it? Is it that you have arranged to meet with someone secretly that you come such and tarry in the wild places? 
30 And San answered him: 
31 I do not come from Zarahemla, but from a city far in the Land Northward. My message is no secret, but not knowing the lay of the land, and that men came out from the city to harvest, I assumed that the whole region was safe. Ought I to worry about my safety in this region? 
32 And the captain answered him: 
33 It is not safe to tarry alone in these jungles, for they are full of ravenous beasts that can easily overpower a man unarmed. Come into the city with us and we will deliver you up to the Chief Judge. He will receive your message and decide what is to be done with you. 
34 Wherefore, San was taken into the city to be judged by the Chief Judge. 
35 And the Chief Judge of the City of Laman was a Nephite named Wayus. But behold, he was not a righteous man. For, he did puff himself up because of his knowledge of the law and also because of his much riches. Yea, he did live in a palace and had many servants. And it was also his custom to take those who became debtors unto him and make them his servants. But behold, they could never earn enough in his service to pay their debts. Wherefore, they became slaves unto him, even though slavery was not a thing looked well upon by the Nephites. 
36 And this Wayus had great store of fine cloth and of precious things of all kinds. And he did attire himself in robes most costly, with gold and with purple. 
37 And behold, when the people of the city sought to remove him from the judgment seat, he conspired to have their leaders slain or he did cause them to be imprisoned. And in this way he retained the judgment seat, for, all the people feared him exceedingly. 
38 And the guards brought him before Wayus as he sat upon the seat to be examined of him. And Wayus spoke to him harshly: 
39 What is this person that the guards of the gate have taken. Surely, he is not one of us, or he would not be traveling alone in this dangerous country. For, we who live here know of the many dangerous beasts that stalk the jungle round about and we never leave the safety of our city except in groups. Who is this stranger who comes up to our walls and our gates and challenges our authority. 
40 And San answered him, saying: 
41 I am San, son of Sanempet. The same is the High Priest of the City of Mentina in the Land Northward. Behold, I do not come stealthily into your land, nor do I approach your city secretly. But, it is as you say. I am a stranger to your country and know not your ways. Nor am I familiar with all the animals that lurk in your jungles. But behold, I am not afraid of man or beast, for the Lord is with me and He guides my path. 
42 And Wayus knew straightway that this was a holy man and a prophet come unto them and he knew to treat him carefully. Nevertheless, he also knew that to have a prophet in the city was chancy indeed. The more so because he had maintained his judgment seat by wicked means. 
43 And why does one led by the Lord see fit to travel so far from his home in order to visit our city. We have our priests and our teachers. We need no vagabond to come and teach us the ways of the Lord. 
44 And San answered him, saying: 
45 Behold, I do not question the Lord my God. When He bids me go, I go. When He bids me speak, I speak. It is unto this city that He has led me and the Spirit prompts me to open my mouth and cry repentance unto this people. 
46 And Wayus was angry with San. 
47 Be silent! You must know that you speak to the Chief Judge of the People of Laman. I have the power to put you to death, wherefore, I warn you, have a care to what you say. Do you come into our city crying repentance? Of what do we need to repent? Are we not Nephites? Do we not have the temple? And do we not have priests and teachers appointed to teach the scriptures unto us? 
48 Behold, you say that you are the son of a High Priest. Does that make you our High Priest? It does not. You say you come from a city far in the Land Northward. Does that make you one of us? It does not. Do not come here with your message of repentance. You do not even know what we are. How can you think to judge us? 
49 Now, Wayus spoke thus in order to excite the people against San. For, he saw in him a means whereby he might gain favor in the eyes of the people. But San was filled with the Holy Ghost and saw his thoughts. 
50 Do not think that your costly robes and your high seat can hide the intent of your heart, Wayus Chief Judge. For, I see your mind and your thoughts. There is darkness there, yea, there is a mark of darkness upon you that is visible even to the naked eye of him who is not blinded by the fear that you have caused to come over this people. 
51 Behold, you are proud and puffed up. You fill your belly while children suffer for want of food. You clothe yourself with fine clothing while there are naked in the streets of your city. Yea, and you maintain your position of power by wickedness and murder. You, who are the first citizen of this city, are an example of the depth to which a people may sink into sin and corruption. 
52 Behold, you have put a yoke of bondage upon the people and they cannot break free. Yea, in slavery do you support your own wickedness and all the city suffers because of it. 
53 Wherefore, I do cry repentance unto you and unto this city and all its inhabitants. Repent, Wayus! For the hour of the Lord is at hand and should you delay the day of your repentance any longer, the hour shall come upon you and there will be no time for you to make amends. 
54 And Wayus laughed San to scorn and caused that he should be cast into prison and that he should receive no food or water until he died from hunger and thirst. And this he did in the sight and hearing of all the people, and behold, the more part of the people applauded him for it. 
55 And San was cast into a prison and they chained him to a wall. And the guards of the prison taunted him day and night and cast food at his feet where he could not reach it. And they set water also at his feet, that he might see it but not reach it to quench his thirst. And behold, the climate was exceedingly hot and San did suffer much. 
56 But he did remain faithful to the commandment of the Lord. For, the Lord had visited him upon the Way and He did command him to go even unto the City of Laman and cry repentance unto the people. 
57 Wherefore, San raised up his voice unto the Lord in mighty prayer, saying: 
58 Oh Lord, I know that You did command me to go up even to this strange land and city to cry repentance unto the Nephites. And I have begun fulfilling Your commandment. But the people are stiff necked and puffed up in pride. Wherefore, preserve me upon the Way, to the confounding of the people of this city and take away from them their riches. For they do seek to take away my life by depriving me of food and drink. But I know that you can preserve my life. Wherefore, let me tarry upon the Way, that I need no food nor drink. But let your anger be kindled against Wayus, that the people might see Your fury and repent. 
59 And behold, the Lord did answer the prayer of San. For, while he languished in the prison, he did go upon the Way and behold, he did not require food nor drink for many days. And the guards were astonished that he did not perish, for the heat was extreme. 
60 But this is not all. Behold, the Lord did bring a curse upon the City of Laman and all its inhabitants. For, they trusted not their neighbors and esteemed them all to be thieves and robbers. Wherefore, each man and woman did hide up their precious things that their neighbor might not steal them from them. 
61 But behold, the Lord did curse so that when the people went again to their hiding place to count their gold, or when they sought again their precious violet to wear in the sight of their neighbors, behold, their precious and costly things were not to be found. 
62 And He did also cause that swarms of insects might infest the wilderness round about the city so that, when the inhabitants went out to collect the fruits and the food that the jungle produced, they found only the husks instead and there was no food to gather. 
63 Now, the people of City of Laman had grown accustomed to the food that was produced naturally in the wilderness round about the city, and they toiled not in the soil to produce their own. Wherefore, the swarms were a sore curse indeed. For, they were forced to send to other cities for food. But behold, because they had hidden up their precious things, they had not wherewith to pay for the food brought to them from their neighbors. And except for some relief that came to them from certain families in Zarahemla, their neighbors took their goods and turned around again. Yea, they turned their faces unto their own cities once again and departed leaving none of their goods for the relief of the suffering of the people of the City of Laman. 
64 Then the people began to remember the words of San, that he had cried repentance unto the chief of their judges. And they went unto Wayus, the Chief Judge, and they reprimanded him sorely, saying: 
65 Why have you brought upon us this curse from heaven? What have you done to bring down upon us the swarm? And behold, where are your riches and why do you appear now before us in the same attire we saw you in yesterday? And the day before? Is it because you too have hid up your precious things and now cannot find them? Behold, this is the curse that has befallen us because you did not treat honorably with the stranger in our land. 
66 And Wayus was dismayed at the rush of people to his seat and he did attempt to defend himself, saying: 
67 Why do you lay this burden at my feet? And why do you trouble the judgment seat with your own iniquities? 
68 And certain of the mob stepped forward and gave him answer, saying: 
69 It is you to whom this prophet has come. We heard his harsh words to you when you observed him from the judgment seat. Did he not reveal to all the depth of your wickedness? Or do you deny that he spoke the truth? 
70 And he delayed them, saying: 
71 But tell me, surely, what part of his parable belonged solely to me and what part is a more general transgression to be shared among all who are in this city? It is certain that he did recriminate against me for some of my deeds. But, tell me, which among you who secured his goods yesterday has found them again today? 
72 And they cried, saying: 
73 Nay, but we are all penniless today because of the curse laid upon us. 
74 And he answered them, saying: 
75 Then complain not to me because this man has stolen your goods with a curse. He cried not only against me, but against all the people of this city. 
76 And the people beat their fists and clamored loudly that the judgment seat be taken from Wayus and given unto another. But Wayus called forth the guard of the city to protect him from the riot. And when the people had calmed a little, he again spoke unto them, saying: 
77 What is it that you wish me to do? 
78 And they cried in one voice: 
79 Bring out the prophet and let him be heard by the people. Then we shall judge him, and you. 
80 Wherefore, Wayus called for the prisoner to be brought out to be heard by all the people and judged. And when San was brought out, the people set a post at the center of the city and bound him to it. And they beat him, and spit on him, and reviled him, and accused him of theft. 
81 And after he had been thus scourged by the people, he was brought again before the judgment seat to be examined by the judge and his officers. And behold, San stood without aid before the judgment seat of the City of Laman, so much was he strengthened by the Lord. 
82 And Wayus questioned him again, saying: 
83 Behold, the people say that you have brought down upon us the judgments of God. What do you say to this, stranger? 
84 And San responded, saying: 
85 The people speak of what they know. 
86 And Wayus questioned him: 
87 What is it that you find so wicked in the way of our people? Come, you are a teacher. Teach me. 
88 And San spoke boldly, saying: 
89 Behold, when the beggar casts up his petition unto you, do you impart unto him of your own goods? Do you give him bread and wine of your own larder because he is hungry and because he is athirst? And do you give unto him your own cloak because he is naked? And do you pray for him and administer unto him because he is sick with the fever? Do you set him in your storehouse for the night because he is alone and penniless and full of sorrows. And then in the morning, do you find him lodging? Are these the things you do unto your neighbor who is in need? 
90 And the people round about the judgment seat laughed him to scorn. 
91 Still, he continued, saying: 
92 Nay, you do not these things unto him that is needy. Instead, you give him bread to eat and wine to drink for a price. And, if he have not any coin, yet you give him what he needs for a price. And when he eat and drink but cannot pay, you demand the value of the provender. And behold, when he cannot produce the money, you cast him into slavery for the price of bread and wine. 
93 Behold, the Lord has shown me your customs. It is because of your wickedness that the Lord has commanded me to come into this city and preach repentance unto the inhabitants of it. Yea, it is because of the great wickedness of the City of Laman, that I do prophesy against you. 
94 And behold, Wayus knew that San spoke the truth, yea, and all the people also knew, but they laughed at him, saying: 
95 This man is jealous of us. He is not accustomed to the prosperity that we have because he comes from a country where such things are not known. Behold, his forefathers departed out of the Land Southward and took their posterity into wilderness places and now, seeing our blessed state, he is offended. 
96 And Wayus took courage again, seeing that the people of the city were of a like mind as his own. And he stood up at the judgment seat and spoke to the people, saying: 
97 Nay, let us not be so hasty in judging this man. If it be true that he has not known of such wealth and prosperity as is ours, then we might understand how he might be offended. Let us release him, that he might come to know our people and accustom himself to life as it is in the civilized world. For, it does appear to me that he desires to live among the Nephites in this part of the land. Wherefore, if that be his desire, he will need to become accustomed to things among the Nephites. For, is it not so that he will find things very much the same wherever he wanders in these lands? 
98 And the people agreed and cried out for his release. Now, Wayus did this, not out of kindness or charity, but because he believed that San had brought down upon the city the judgments of God and he bethought him of how he might rid his City of this prophet. For, he knew that the people loved their riches, even as he did, and if this prophet walked among the more part of the people preaching against them as he had against him, then they would clamor for his death and the onus would not fall upon him. 
99 Wherefore, he did cause the guards to release San and he did apologize largely for the manner in which he had been treated, saying: 
100 Behold, we are unused to prophets in our city. For, our priests and teachers serve us well. Wherefore, walk now safely among the people and observe them. I do not ask you to hold your tongue, for you are a prophet and such things as the Spirit might give you utterance can only be for the good of this great city. 
101 And San left the judgment seat knowing the artifice of Wayus, but also rejoicing and praising God for his deliverance from bondage. And, as he left the judgment seat, behold, a small group of righteous men and women came to him and entreated him to follow them to that part of the city where they made their homes. For, they were afraid of what the people might do to him. Yea, they entreated him, saying: 
102 Come now with us, San, even down toward the river side of the city. For that is where we make our abode. And there are those among our neighbors who will hear your words and succor you. Whereas, in the part of the city in which you now stand, there are none who will do anything for you. 
103 And San went with them down to their homes, which were on the river side of the city, even down away from the rich and spacious houses and buildings which occupied the more wealthy sector. 


CHAPTER 3 
1 Now, that part of the city where the more humble dwelt was not filled with large and spacious homes and buildings. But behold, neither was that part of the city a place of squalor or poverty. Even the humblest of homes was well kept and the surroundings were pleasing. 
2 And one of the men who had entreated him to come down with him to the humbler part of the city was called Nephihet, and he took him unto his own home. And behold, he bid him sit in his own chair, and when he was sat, he did kneel down and wash his feet and anoint them. And he did also anoint his head with healing oil and gave him mild food and drink to his comfort. 
3 And Nephihet did also place a robe upon his shoulders and, when he was comforted in all the ways in which a healer might comfort his charge, he bid him take lodging in his own home with his family. 
4 And this charity did give heart unto San and he blessed them, saying: 
5 In all the city, there is none like unto Nephihet and his family. Surely, the Lord will bless you in all that you do. And he took each member of the family and laid hands on them and blessed them. 
6 And when San had taken his rest and had arisen again refreshed, Nephihet took him to where the people of that quarter of the city met together at the end of the day. And the people did wait upon him, and begged him to speak. 
7 Now behold, the number of them was exceedingly few. Yea, there were but twenty two families that gathered out of the whole of the city to hear the words of San. But he was not discouraged and began to speak unto them, saying: 
8 Behold, the things that Wayus said about me are in great measure true. I have come unto you from the Land Northward. Yea, and it is true that my forefathers left this land to travel into unknown places. And they did live in the wilderness for a generation and had not benefit of riches or precious things of any kind. 
9 But, you would think from the speech of Wayus, that such things have rendered them poor and desolate and that their descendents have grown into savages. But I say unto you that the words of Wayus are not true, for my people have continued to serve the Lord in all things and in all places, and their knowledge of Him has become great. Yea, the Nem, for so we call ourselves now, have become a great people and the Lord is with us. 
10 And behold, riches we have in plenty, but we have them in common one with another. For, all people receive of the abundance which the Lord has provided. Is it so here? I ask you, is it so among the people of this great city? 
11 And, with downcast eyes, the people bowed their heads and said; No. 
12 Why then, does Wayus rejoice in this great difference between our peoples? It is because he has set his heart upon the riches and the getting of them. Yea, his heart is so set upon these things that he casts off his duty to provide for the comfort and safety of the people of his city. This is wickedness and will cause the downfall of all that you know. 
13 And behold, this saying did disturb some of the people who had gathered to listen to the voice of this prophet from a far country, and some did take up their couch and their families and they did depart from before San. But, unto some, the words he spoke were the words of their hearts and they did continue to listen and to hearken unto him. And he did continue speaking unto them: 
14 Behold, whenever people gather together to save themselves from the dangers and perils of the world, belief in the Christ who is to come must form the foundation and purpose for their gathering. For, any man may build a house and hedge it round about. And that place of refuge is as safe from the perils of the wild world as are the walls of this city. And behold, he may set his sons to guard it day and night, and it is as safe as this great city. 
15 But, the day comes when the earth shall reel to and fro. Yea, there comes a day when, should a man find himself upon the road, he will not see his way and the earth shall rise up under his feet and cast him down. In that day, shall these walls save him? Yea, a day comes when, should a woman find herself at the well, she will not see her way and the earth rising up shall cast her down. In that day, shall these walls save her? And when all creation shall shake with a fury, and this great city is burned with a fire come down out of heaven, shall the man and the woman be preserved? It is a question. 
16 Shall a man and a woman heap to themselves riches and costly things to hedge up the wilderness? And with such a hedge, shall they think to bring safety unto themselves and their children? I ask you, does their rich and costly things protect them from any risk or peril? In the day of tribulation, what shall their riches buy them? When the earth has thrown down the crop, shall they buy meal? When the fire has burned the city, shall they buy shelter? I say unto you, Nay. For the day of their salvation is at hand. 
17 And shall a man abuse his neighbor, and make a slave of him, and beat him, and cast him into a prison, and feel secure in his standing? Or shall he by usury make his neighbor his slave, and the day of tribulation coming, still ask of him his succor? Shall a man heap up houses to let and oxen to hire and, setting a yoke upon his neighbor, expect them to come to his aid in the midst of his adversity? Is it possible that adversity should come to him alone? And shall he believe that any that he has abused shall not also suffer the tribulation, and yet feel some loyalty and charity toward him? It shall not be. 
18 Or behold, shall he heap up a storehouse of grain against the day of tribulation, but abuse his neighbor and make a slave of him? Shall not his neighbor assail his storehouse in the day of tribulation? And let him set all his sturdy men against the doors, shall the doors stand against the whole city? It shall not be. 
19 For, I say unto you all, The days that come shall test all people in this land, be they rich or poor, be they mighty or meek. Let every one of you lay up in store those riches that shall account unto you for righteousness. For, in the day of tribulation, all people shall seek for the wise to guide them. And, if the wise be despised of you, wherein shall they guide. And if wisdom has become despised, all is foolishness. Let him lead you then and guide you who will, but you shall not escape. 
20 Then the people cried out unto San that he should preach unto them all that would befall them and their city, and he did continue to preach unto them, saying: 
21 Behold, far away in the Land Northward from whence I am come unto you, we have built up the waste places and even a great city. We call this city, Mentina, or as it is called by many, Meninta. And this, in the tongue of the Ammonites who live among you, is “a place of salt.” Behold, this place has become the savor of the earth, for we live in peace, feasting upon all that the Lord does bestow upon us from heaven, having all things in common. And there are no poor among us, for we succor all, both great and small. In this do we call ourselves blessed, for in Mentina, there is no man or woman who causes suffering knowingly. 
22 For, we do seek the guidance and wisdom of they whom the Lord does call to be our governors. And we also do seek the wisdom of the old and halt. And we do seek the wisdom of our Peli. And we do seek the wisdom of our learned ones. And behold, we do diligently work for the good of all people and all people work to sustain and support each other. 
23 Behold, I spring from a line of teachers and healers who offer their services not for hire, though the laborer is worthy of it, but they do their work freely and beg of no one. For, in Mentina, the baker is free with his bread and the fisher is free with his fish. And behold, when there is corn, there is corn for all and none puts up his petition unanswered in the City of Mentina. And because of this, there are none who may claim poverty, for all receive of their wants freely. And, when the city puts up its stores, it is for all people that the storehouse is filled. Yea, even the stranger in our streets is as welcome to the abundance of the Lord as the citizen. 
24 And the people asked him: 
25 Does no man own his field then? And shall all men tread the winepress together? And he answered them, saying: 
26 Nay, but person, be they man or woman, has the stewardship of their own land, or shop, or press, or ship, and does work by the sweat of their face. But behold, they do offer up the fruit of their labor over that which is necessary for their own living. And, if a man make shoes, he does put shoes on his family, that they be not naked. But the increase of his labor he does give freely to his neighbor, that he be not naked. And if a man go to catch fish in the lake, he dries the fish and pounds it, and that which is necessary for his own family he keeps back, that they be not hungry. But behold, the increase of his labor he does give freely to his neighbor, that he be not hungry. 
27 And behold, there are days of tribulation and adversity. But, when the day of tribulation comes, do you think the people assail the storehouse to take from it all that they need? I say unto you, It is not so. For all receive freely and there is no violence. For again, there is no hedge raised up and no strong men guarding the gate. Behold, all receive of the abundance of the city equally and, in the day of violence, there is none who must resort to violence. 
28 And behold, this is not all. For, all men and women go up to the High Place together. Yea, the temple of the Lord is open to all who would hear His voice and seek His face. Is it so in this great city? I know not. But, I say unto you, Even the sojourner in the land is taken up to the High Place, if he wish it, to seek the Lord there and there is no hedge upon it. 
29 And all men and women raise up their thanks unto God both day and night. And they do also meet often to celebrate His coming together. And in their synagogues they do teach the peaceable things of God with joy, with meekness, but also with celebrations. Yea, in spiritual things also they do have all things in common and none is prevented. 
30 And these things which San spoke troubled the people, for they knew that such was not the way of their city, nor of their people. For, they had not anything in common and, if a man lacked, he had to buy that which he needed. And, if he had not wherewith to buy, then was he made a slave because of his lack. 
31 And also they knew that their synagogues were divided among the rich and the poor. And only the rich met in prayer with the rich. The poor did meet in lowly circumstances with the poor, as was the tradition of the city. And behold, when a prophet or teacher came among them from the City of Zarahemla, they were taken in by the rich and entertained in their synagogues. The poor did wait upon the rich to hear the words of such teachers, but were never welcome to hear his words themselves. Such was the state of things in the City of Laman. 
32 And San, seeing that the words which he had spoken touched the souls of the hearer, he did speak the more plainly unto them. For, he perceived that they did hunger for the word of the Lord, and they did thirst for that water which fills the soul. Wherefore, he did preach unto them the Gospel of Peace, saying: 
33 Behold, I perceive that you do seek after righteousness. Therefore, I shall open my mouth to you and teach you that which the Spirit does dictate to my mind. 
34 Seek no more to satisfy men, but satisfy God. Seek no more the counsel of the wise in this city, but seek the wisdom that proceeds from the mouth of God. Seek no more to please them who rule over you, but seek to please your God. Seek the face of God, for He is mighty to save. 
35 Lay no more up stores against the day of your tribulation, for, that day is come upon you, and greater tribulation is to come. Rather, give of your substance to the beggar and raise him up. For, I say unto you, The aid of the beggar shall be the greater value for you when all the earth is in tribulation. Yea, work with your might to provide for yourselves, but give of your increase unto all that lift up a petition unto you. For, surely they shall support and sustain you also when you are all beggars upon the road. 
36 Pray always unto the Lord, who is the Son of God, even that Creator who give abundantly unto all living. Lift up your heads and cast your eyes upon the face of Him who is mighty to save. Bow not your heads down unto that man who shall be as much a beggar as you in the day of his tribulation, but lift up your eyes and your voice unto that God who shall come to save you all. 
37 Meet often in your meager synagogues and give thanks unto God that you sit upon the floor without mats and not upon a couch in a place elevated above the congregation. Sing praises and thanks unto God and not unto your officials. Make priests unto yourselves who are humble as you and set no wealthy man above you to sing for you until all are equally wealthy. Make teachers unto yourselves who are humble and who seek the face of Christ who shall come. For, the Spirit shall give such teachers their voices and they shall teach you of the peaceable things of the kingdom. 
38 Make no man or woman an offender because of their words. For, as the world is large and spacious, so therefore, is there much space and many peoples. Because their belief and their words may be different, this does not signify that their words are not the words of Christ. But give ear unto their words and subject them unto the Holy Ghost, who shall testify unto you of truth. Yea, you need not worry that any shall deceive you, if you have the Holy Ghost as your companion, both old and young, both great and small, for it is He who makes a surety of those things which are true. Yea, He does make a surety and a certainty, even to the testifying of truth unto your minds and your hearts. Wherefore, none can assail His storehouse, and you shall have riches laid up in store, even riches in heaven. 
39 And, from this time forth, make all your comings and your goings in the name of the Lord. Yea, pray in His name unto the Father. Yea, call upon the Father in the name of the Son. For, His atonement is unto you as a mighty bulwark and a ward and citadel. Yea, bless all things in His name. Baptize in His name. Wash yourselves in His name and cloth yourselves in His name. Raise up your voices each day in a joyous way in His name, for He does hear the prayers of the righteous and answers them. 
40 And, when the Spirit of Prophecy comes upon anyone among you, despise it not, for it is a gift given of the Holy Ghost, but send that one forth to preach in the city. Support the prophet with your own substance and withhold not, for, howbeit a whole city might be saved. But if you withhold your substance, the words of the prophet might be dulled by hunger or thirst, or the necessities of life. Wherefore, make not beggars of your prophets , but lift up the hands that hang down. 
41 Do always the words of Christ. Let not any petition rise up from any widow, but care for them in all judgment. Yea, let not any cause occasion the widow’s petition, but anticipating their want, care for them in Christ’s name. 
42 And likewise, let not the fatherless go abroad in the streets to gain a living for their distressed mother and for their brothers and sisters. Nay, for this is wickedness. Let the fatherless be cared for with all judgment and not by commandment, but freely without extortion. For behold, he who makes a slave of the weak shall be destroyed by the weak in the day of their tribulation. 
43 And, if there be any among you who is sick, let them also be cared for tenderly. And call upon them who have the Gifts of the Spirit to heal them. Yea, call upon all they who have great faith to lay hands upon them and to pray for them who are prostrate, that they may be healed. 
44 Now, you mothers and fathers, teach your children diligently to follow the Lord and not after the things of the world. And this is a difficult task I lay upon you. For, in this city, all men teach the tender to seek after riches and to lay up riches against some futurity. But this is wickedness and the Lord shall not support such a teaching. Behold, it is hard to live in a city and among people who shall daily teach your children to seek after the world, but you must do it, or all is lost. 
45 In short, love one another. Be as family one to another. For, what father, seeing his son hungering, shall withhold his provender that his son die? And what mother, seeing her daughter is naked, shall withhold her own raiment? And shall a brother or sister remain without the house upon the street? Nay, but they are rushed inside with much rejoicing. Yea, you shall give shelter within your own house. You shall clothe the naked and feed the hungry, for, this is the Gospel of Peace and anything else comes of wickedness. 
46 And, if the wise of your city do smirk, yea, if they shall wink at you and wag the finger, let them be. For they receive their reward daily. But, in the day of their tribulation, when all things are in commotion, and the hungry do assail their storehouse, who shall wink then? 
47 Even let there be they who are considered unworthy knock upon your door, shall you turn them back into the street? I say unto you, Nay. But you shall feed them, clothe them and send them on with money in their purse. For, who may judge the heart of any man but that God who created him? And who may take the full measure of any creature but the Creator thereof? Do not think to take up that mantle, for it is Christ’s and He employs no servant there. 
48 And all these things ought you to do, who seek the face of the Lord. For, if perchance you do find Him, and you have not followed His precepts, how shall you address Him? Oh Lord, King of Heaven and Earth! We know that You are holy and that You have created all things. Yea, we know that the winds and the earth obey Your command and rejoice in the full measure of their creation. But, behold Lord, we have not sought Your face nor followed Your precepts. But we are Yours nonetheless, wherefore, let us enter into Your presence. 
49 Behold, I say unto you, If you have not been His friend in the day of your probation, He will not acknowledge you in the day of His glory. Yea, if you have failed to call upon Him, He shall not acknowledge your greeting when all the earth is finished. Seek Him diligently, even in the hour of your adversity and He will comfort you in tribulation. 


CHAPTER 4 
1 And many who listened to the teachings of San were overcome with joy. For, they had sought the face of the Lord and now this prophet had come among them to confirm the things they knew to be true. And they did rejoice in his words and sought him all the more to teach them. 
2 But there were some who were ashamed because of his words. For they knew that they had not walked uprightly before the Lord and they did still covet the riches and the comforts of the rich. And there were others who wished to use San’s words to overthrow the Chief Judge and Governor of the City so that they might rule in his stead. Now, these men took an accounting of the teaching of San unto Wayus, but they did turn his words against him, saying: 
3 Behold, most noble Judge and Governor over all this people, we know that you are worthy to be our ruler and that you have ruled in righteousness. Wherefore, your judgment is righteous always. Judge now this man for us and rid us of his teachings. 
4 And Wayus inquired of them, saying: 
5 What is it that this man has taught that has so offended you that you should come entreating me to rid you of him and his words? And they answered him, saying: 
6 Behold, he teaches all to seek not after the righteous judgments of our governor, but to follow ones own conscience and the dictates of ones own heart. This thing is hurtful to our young people. For behold, they think they may live in this great city and yet believe that they need not obey your laws. We desire that all our youths learn the ways, customs and laws of our people and hope to have peace in our city because of them. But behold, this teacher does exhort them to seek not after them. Wherefore, we do ask you to rid us of this prophet. 
7 And Wayus, seeing his opportunity, did send his mighty men to take San, but he was forewarned in a dream and went out of the city before the Judge had ordered his men. Wherefore, he was not to be found among the poor of the city, for he had escaped the judgment of the unrighteous. 
8 And Wayus was angry that he was unable to lay his hands on San and also with the poor who had sheltered him and listened to him. Wherefore, he ordered that all the poor, or rather all they who had not riches and precious things, should be removed from the city and cast out. And this he caused to be done with great violence, and many people were killed. And all they who survived the cleansing, or so they called it, of the City of Laman, hid themselves as best they could in the wilderness, and many took their flight even into other cities round about. 
9 And behold, San did stand himself once again by the gate and did prophesy against the city, saying: 
10 Behold, I do curse the City of Laman and all its inhabitants. For, you have cast out the prophets from your midst and this you have done with the shedding of blood. Wherefore, I do curse all the inhabitants of this wicked city with a curse. And this shall be the extent of the curse – in the hour that the Lord, Jesus Christ, does make his appearance unto this people, even as has been promised by the holy prophets, the City of Laman and all its inhabitants shall be burned by fire, and none shall survive the day. 
11 Yea, you shall shut your gates and think yourselves safe behind your battlements. But behold, fire of the Lord shall descend from the heavens and it shall consume you all. And behold, even the rocks shall not abide the heat of His wrath and all shall be overturned. And behold, this place shall be a hiss and a by word, and even the beasts of the wilderness shall avoid it. 
12 Now, when the guards of the gate heard him speak thus, they sought to lay hands on him, that they might deliver him up to Wayus to be judged for the hard words he had spoken against the city. But behold, in the moment that they were about to lay their hands on him, they were confounded, for they found him not, and he was taken away by the Spirit to another place. 
13 And San continued to teach those few who had escaped the city. And behold, each day he remained with them in the wilderness round about the City of Laman, more people did begin to come out of the city to find refuge with the outcasts. And, within a short space of time, they became a great people in the wilderness, so many were the people who repaired unto them from the City of Laman, and also from other cities. And they did begin to build a settlement a day’s journey from the city. 
14 For, the rule of Wayus become very strait. Yea, Wayus the Chief Judge of the city did tremble in fear of the words of San. For, both the prophecy which he spoke at the gate against his people, but also the things he spoke when he taught the people did fill Wayus exceedingly, for he could not escape them. 
15 And behold, Wayus sent a party of armed men out of the city to seek out this settlement and to put the inhabitants of it to the sword. And to justify this, he did accuse them of treasonous and blasphemous teachings. And the men did search for the space of many days to find the outcasts. And behold, they did find them and the settlement that they had made in the wilderness and they did make their plans to attack the settlement by night. 
16 But San was warned of their plan and he sent all of the people out of the settlement. Now, when the men of Wayus came into the settlement, they found it empty and they also found evidence that all the people had departed out of it. Wherefore, they believed that there must have been a spy or informant among them and the captain of the party, whose name was Menem, did begin to examine each man. 
17 And behold, not finding any man that could have informed the outcasts of the City of their impending doom at the hands of the armed men, but also knowing that Wayus would not be satisfied with his report, Menem did accuse one of his men of treason and he, with his own sword, took the man’s life in the sight of all his men. 
18 Now, this did cause his men to distrust and even to hate Menem. And, when he ordered his men to turn again and return unto the City of Laman, with the excuse that there had been a traitor who warned the outcasts and allowed them to escape into the wilderness, behold, half of the men were determined to slay him. Wherefore, they did attack and slay their captain. But half the men agreed not with the rebels and they did take up their swords and did battle with them after that they had slain Menem. 
19 And behold, the two sides did fight each other until there was not one man left of them. But their bodies lay strewn in the streets of the settlement and the wild animals of the wilderness came in and devoured them. 
20 And, when the outcasts of Laman returned to their settlement, they saw the carnage and would not go again into their homes, and they abandoned their settlement and fled out of the land, even unto distant cities. 
21 And thus ended the mission of San unto the inhabitants of the City of Laman. And behold, we know that the City of Laman was verily burned at the Lord’s coming. For, it is written in another place and we need not doubt the truth of it. 


CHAPTER 5 
1 Now behold, San, when all the outcasts of the City of Laman were fled, he was ushered by the Spirit to the place where his sister, Himneth, was laboring. And it was in the City of Josh that Himneth was laboring to teach the Gospel of Peace. 
2 And she did rejoice exceedingly when she did see him in the streets of Josh. For, the people of Josh were even more puffed up in pride than were the people of Laman and they had rejected her words. But behold, because she was but a woman, they had paid no heed to her preaching and did abuse her daily. And her situation was dire indeed, for the people of Josh did withhold food and drink from her, and she did wander the streets alone. 
3 But, when she saw her brother preaching in the streets of Josh, she knew that her Lord had saved her. But behold, San did not readily recognize his sister, for she had been abused and beaten, and also she was much wasted by the want of food. And when she came close to him, he saw her face clearly and knew that she was his own relation and his heart poured out to her because of her dire condition. 
4 And behold, his anger was also kindled against the people of Josh and he addressed them in his wrath, saying: 
5 Oh, you people of Josh, hear these my words which I shall speak unto you. The Lord God is not pleased with any who would abuse his daughters. Yea, gather round, you mighty ones of Josh, for this day I shall speak the word of the Lord unto you. For, His wrath is kindled against this city and this day you shall surely hear of it. 
6 And there was in the street passing by, one of the lesser judges of the city and he did hear San and answered him, saying: 
7 Belay your wrath, stranger. For, what can this wretch be to you? Behold, she is but a lunatic come from northern climes and has been many weeks prophesying against this good city and its people. And what can it be to you, who I see by your bearing and your attire are obviously a man of wisdom and of substance, that she has been thus handled roughly by they whom she has handled with so little respect? 
8 And San looked upon the man and was for a moment unable to respond, for his was very hot in his anger toward the people of the city. 
9 And the name of the lesser judge who addressed San was Ohmer. And this same Ohmer spoke again, directing his words unto San but also unto the multitude that had begun to gather around them. Yea, he spoke as if to San, but in reality he made his speech to please the people that had gathered, saying: 
10 Behold, we all know of this woman, Himneth. Did she not come boldly into our city and inquire of us about our ways and our customs? And, finding them not to her liking, is this not the woman who began to preach to us and to impose her ways upon us? 
11 Yea, she did extol the virtues of her people and condemned the way we choose to live. What is it to her that we are rich with the blessings that the Lord has seen fit to bestow upon us? Can it be anything but wickedness that has caused her people to become a vagabond race? Yea, one can easily make out her jealousy, and can this be anything but the type and image of all her people? That being as it is, why should anyone in this great city give heed to anything she has to say? 
12 And behold, being so rabid in her condemnation of our ways and customs, which all people know to be good and true, how can anyone judge us for treating her as she really is, a lunatic? Or is it to be expected that thinking people take a mad dog into their homes? 
13 And after this wise did Ohmer speak of the sister of San. And he was inflamed with wrath. But behold, his sister did take him by the hand and led him away from the multitude, and she calmed him, saying: 
14 Behold, it is with a glad heart that I greet you, my brother. Let us away from these people, that you may inform me of all that has happened with you. Yea, let us away, that these may be appeased and you and I may find a place to speak. 
15 But San was not calmed by the words of Himneth and he approached the multitude and addressed them, saying: 
16 What is the hospitality of this city, that would treat a traveler so? Have I been in Josh but five minutes and I have seen the charity of her people? I say unto you, Nay. But I have seen some of her character. And should I extol your virtues, who would treat a woman thus? And let us assume that she is mad, do you so to all the afflicted of your city? And how does any who suffers fare at your hands? Speak! I would know your answer! 
17 And Ohmer answered him, saying: 
18 What would you have us do to the woman, being mad? Are you also from her country, that you would compel us also to your ways and thinking? 
19 And San answered, saying: 
20 Of a surety no! For, I would get away with my life. It appears to me that anyone from a foreign land might fare no better here than this poor woman. Whose is she? Who is her father and her mother that she should be so treated? Is she the daughter of some enemy to be beaten and abused? Is she the chattel of an enemy that she, because of her parentage, must be so abased? 
21 And Ohmer replied, saying: 
22 Nay, I know nothing of her parentage. She has brought all upon her as you see now simply by her own doing. Her state is none of these good people. She came in unto us and abused herself upon us. Wherefore, my good man, make no mistake, we have given her as good as she gave. 
23 And San spake to him, saying: 
24 Whom then has she beaten? Whom has she mistreated and abused? Unto whom has she withheld food and water? And whose child has she had her way with? I perceive from your faces that she has not received of you that which she has given, for, how could it have been in her power to do you damage such as you have done unto her? 
25 Behold, I know your hearts and your minds. Is it to be believed that such evil can exist in the heart of any Nephite? What is this that you have done? Is this the law of your city? If so, show me where it is written. 
26 Now, to this the people had no answer, for they had caught themselves in a snare of their own making. Surely, they heaped ridicule and onus upon the unknown woman, and this was easily done. Yea, the people looked on while all that was evil was done unto the strange woman prophetess. Wherefore, when one who spoke with strength and with the Spirit indicted them, they knew their own guilt and were ashamed. 
27 But behold, they were ashamed not because they had done evil, but because they had been found out and exposed. Wherefore, they were inflamed in their hearts and Ohmer stood forward again as the mouth of the people and he accused San, saying: 
28 You are also of this sort! Wherefore, behold, we will treat you as suits our custom. 
29 And Ohmer strode forward that he might strike San with his staff. But behold, San was filled with the Holy Ghost and rebuked him, saying: 
30 Touch me not! For I am filled with the Holy Ghost. Wherefore, I give you fair warning, if you stretch forth your hand to touch me, you shall surely be stricken down to the earth! 
31 And Ohmer was filled with fear and retreated behind the growing multitude. And he incited the multitude with many words, saying that this man ought to be taken by force and made to answer for his words before the Chief Judge of the city. And the multitude did press forward to take him, but he rebuked them also, saying: 
32 In the name of Jesus Christ, my master, I command you. Touch me not! For, any who shall stretch forth the hand to do me injury, him shall the Lord strike in His mighty wrath! 
33 And behold, the multitude felt the power of the Spirit in San and they stayed themselves. 
34 Then did San open his mouth unto all the people and he did condemn them all, saying: 
35 Surely, there is none more wicked in all the world than the people of Josh! What could this woman have said that could justify what you have done unto her. And I declare before God that you have all done this unto her. 
36 Behold! She is beaten, ravished and left to starve in the streets, and who can declare unto me the cause? Will any of you rehearse to me the words so evil that she spoke unto you that would justify this cruelty? Or is it even possible that she could have so much evil to say? Is it possible that so evil a people exist who can cause such an unrighteous judgment come upon a noble woman! 
37 For, I declare unto you that this woman is of noble birth, even the daughter of a noble people. She is a prophetess among her own and speaks with the Spirit of God. There is not one soul in her own city that does not esteem her as among the very gems of the treasury. And who of you can claim the same? 
38 And the lesser judge Ohmer stood forth once again to defend his people, saying: 
39 We knew not of her birth or her status. Do you say that this woman comes of noble family? Does her father have some standing then, that we should esteem her as any more than you see here? 
40 And San answered him, saying: 
41 This one is the daughter of Sanempet, who is mighty in the eyes of not one city, but of a multitude of cities. Do you not know the name? He it was who subdued the Gadiantons in the Land Northward! 
42 Now, this saying frightened the people of Josh, and not least of all, Ohmer. For, they believed the raving woman to be of lowly birth and, therefore, felt free to treat her as a slave. But there was a law decreed in Josh which made the sons and daughters of the wealthy families immune from the statutes, and also that to touch such a one was a crime worthy of death. Wherefore, when they heard San say these things, many of the multitude did begin to disperse. But behold, San was not finished speaking unto the people and he continued, saying: 
43 What say you fathers of this great city? Would you that I inform that great Sanempet that you have dishonored his daughter so? Or do you not fear reprisal from one so great as he? Speak, fathers! Which of you will not mourn the loss of your fair sons, a fair recompense for what you have done to the daughter of the mighty? And which of you will not shriek to watch the same done unto your fair daughters as has been done upon this woman? 
44 And again Ohmer strode forth to calm the people and to speak in their defense, saying: 
45 Believe us when we say that we had no knowledge of who this woman was, nay, nor of her parentage. We knew only that she did cry against the good people of this city. Yea, and all will attest that she did condemn us all to destruction because of our customs. And I ask you, how are our customs to be so despised, being the same as all the great cities of this land? 
46 And San answered him, saying: 
47 What can be the ways and customs of this people that she could have had anything to say that did justify this that you see before you? 
48 And Ohmer answered, saying: 
49 Surely, she did find great occasion to condemn us for our great riches. Now, this ought not to be done, for it is only because the Lord does choose to bestow upon us His blessings that we have our riches. And how, then, shall this one come in unto us and cry repentance because we are worthy and the Lord does see fit to bless us? 
50 And San replied unto him, saying: 
51 If it so be that you are so prospered by 
the Lord, it must be because of great righteousness. Wherefore, I must ask again, what has she said that could bring upon her such a wicked retribution? For again, if the Lord has blessed you with riches, then it must be that you follow the admonition of the Lord – that you seek riches in order that you might with them do great good. But where is the good? 
52 Behold, I look to my left and to my right and I see great and spacious houses. Yea, and I look above me and I see the towers of the city. And I look at its denizens and I see costly apparel and jewelry. And this you say comes from the Lord and by His grace. But, why then, do I look down and see such treatment of this visitor to your city? I ask myself, how can this be? 
53 Has she stolen ought? 
54 And the people answered, Nay.
55 Then has she played the harlot? 
56 And the people answered, Nay. 
57 Has she conspired against the rule of this country and against its laws? 
58 And the people answered, Nay. 
59 Has she killed or committed some mayhem? 
60 And the people answered, Nay. 
61 It is a strange thing then. You say to me and expect me to accept, that you have done almost all that I have spoken against a woman merely because she spoke out against your custom. Are you all in like bondage? Is there no freedom to speak at all in your city? For, if this be the case, then I distrust that you have attained such wealth by the hand and heart of God. 
62 And Ohmer cried out because San began to disparage the people for their riches. 
63 You are of a surety one of her kind. Speak truth, is it not so? 
64 And San answered him, saying: 
65 I am her brother, and the son of that same Sanempet of whom I have spoken. Shall you treat me as you have her? Is this the law in your city? Shall I starve in your streets? Shall I be beaten and spit upon? Shall you have whatever way you wish with me in the sight of all men? I declare unto you, if your like were to be found anywhere in the Land Northward, you would be rooted out as the Gadiantons. None of you would escape. 
66 And with these words, behold, the multitude rushed in upon San to take away his life. But behold, he did stretch forth his hand and it was unto them as he had forewarned. For, all those who touched even the hem of his sleeve fell to the earth as if dead. And a cry and a tumult rose up from the multitude, but they did cease to attempt to take him, or to take away his life. Then did San stretch forth his hands and then did he lift up his voice unto the multitude: 
67 Behold, I speak to this whole city. Because you do set yourselves up as the judge of all people, and because you would see fit to treat any person as you have treated this prophetess, yea, and because you would condone it and even revel in it upon your own streets and in front of your own houses, I do cry against you. Repent and seek the face of Christ! For, should He come upon you in this wicked hour, there shall not stand one of you. 
68 Do you wonder at the wrath of a brother at the sight of this his sister? Think not that you have seen even the fraction of the wrath of the Lord! Surely, He does not stay His hand in blessing all they who believe on Him and delight in His name. Do not think because He delights in blessing His servants that He will stay His mighty hand in doing justice unto they who controvert His law. I do not think He will care about your ways and your customs, nay, nor will He give ear to one word of your justification when He looks upon this, His servant and all that you have done unto her. 
69 Did she condemn you for your riches? I know not, for I heard not her words. But I say unto you, I have no need of such intelligence to ascertain the extent of your wickedness! I have only to look upon the poor wretch upon whom you have cast your judgment. Behold, if this is justified in your sight, what else might a man do in this city? What is more, what else might a man do and claim justification from God for it? 
70 And, if I but praise you all for your worthiness, what wickedness would you justify in me? Yea, if I do as this man has done and praise you in your wicked and abominable state, would you raise me up to be one of your judges? And behold, if I praise you and extol your virtues, and even claim the grace of God in your behalf, as the men you have heaped up to be your rulers do, what horror will you allow me to do in the corners of your city? 
71 Behold, I will testify against you in all the land and, if word of you does not become a hiss out of the mouths of all your neighbors, then I will know that all the Land Southward has become as wicked as you. 
72 You wish us to leave this city, and behold, I shall grant your wish. Yea, I will take my sister and I will depart out of this city, but first you shall hear the word and will of the Lord Jesus Christ. 
73 Behold, when Jesus comes unto this land, as He promised the prophets that He would, there will be but few people left to greet Him. Yea, and of all the cities in this land, those whose citizens mistreat or cast out His servants shall be utterly destroyed by a great fire which He will cause to come down upon them from heaven. Many cities shall be swallowed up as the earth heaves to and fro and yet others will be cast down into the depths of the sea. But, they who reject the prophets when they are come in unto them will be utterly destroyed by fire. 
74 And I say unto you that the time of His appearance speedily comes and will be upon you quickly. You, who have cast out the prophets, repent and come again unto Christ. For, lest you do repent, your lot will be worse than any other city. Yea, your fathers and brothers will not return from their labors, but will be burned up in their shops and in their fields and you will not see them. And behold, your mothers and sisters will not depart from the house, but will be burned up at the basin or in the doorway. And your fine apparel will be consumed. And all your precious things will not stand before the flame. And your spacious houses and your towers will all be brought to the earth by the fire which will consume them. 
75 Can you escape the wrath of a just God when His anger is kindled against you? Do not believe it! Wherefore, repent and come again unto Him who is mighty to save. And behold, if you do this, then will the Lord preserve you. But, if you repent not, your lot shall be the same as all who have rejected the word and will of the Lord. 
76 Then did the multitude break up and disperse, for the people knew that this man was a prophet and that the rulers of the city, knowing of the preaching and the prophesying of San, would not stand long before ordering his death. Wherefore, they did begin to disperse quickly so that they should not be esteemed as being party to his words. 
77 But behold, the men who had approached San to shed his blood, began to stir. For, they were not killed by the power of the Spirit which was in San, but they were stricken down to the street, each one. But, as they arose from their stupor, some of them fled with fear from before the face of the prophet, while others knelt themselves before him and begged his forgiveness. For, while in their stricken state, they had been taken to a place where they were instructed by their grandfathers and, in that place, they came to an understanding of the error of their ways, and they did repent. Wherefore, they knelt themselves down to San and pledged themselves to protect him and his sister in whatever circumstances that might arise. 
78 But behold, San did take them by the hand and lifted them up, admonishing them to kneel before no one but their God. And he did speedily forgive them, for they were truly repentant, and he did accept their offer of service. 
79 And the number of them were seven. And the names of the seven who were stricken by the Spirit and who were taken upon the Way to be instructed were: Stephat, who was Captain of the Gate; and Nepham, his companion in arms; and Hemset, the tanner; and Korim, who begged on the street; and Joram, he who made weapons of all kinds; and Zeezret, his apprentice; and also Phez, who was one of the lesser judges of the city. These are the names of the men who sought to lay hold of San to take away his life, but repented and became the Lord’s disciples. 
80 And they did surround San and his sister and usher them out of the city. And when they were a day’s journey away from the City of Josh, Himneth, the prophetess, was too fatigued to go further. Wherefore, they did build a small shelter for her and they guarded her while she rested. 
81 And behold, San gathered herbs by the gift of the Spirit that was in him, and he foreknew by this gift which were good for healing and which were not, and he did administer unto her by his gift. Wherefore, he did prepare a drought of the plants he had gathered and the odor of it went up and refreshed even they who smelled of it. And he did take the drought unto his sister and did give it unto her to drink. And behold, he blessed the drought with sacred breath and he did pray over it. And, when he had asked for the presence of all the Heavenly Beings who might have anything to do with the healing of his sister and when she had drunk of the drought and rested, she was refreshed in her body and her spirit was strengthened. 
82 And behold, the seven companions once again entreated San to forgive them, for they felt keenly the effects of their sins and wished to be cleansed of them. And San taught them, saying: 
83 Behold, I am not powerful to save. If you wish the effects of your sins to be washed away, then you must make a new covenant with the Lord and you must betoken this new covenant with baptism. For, for this cause was this principle taught unto our fathers, and behold, I know that there are many who still teach this principle in the Land Southward. Wherefore, because you have repented of your sins, you ought to make a covenant to abandon them and never return unto them and seal the covenant with a token of your earnest desire to hold true to it all the days of your lives. If you will do this, then the Savior will wash away even the effects of your sins and you will be justified before Him. Then shall He make you His servants and you may do many mighty works in His name. Is this the desire of your hearts? 
84 And the seven companions answered in one voice that this was the desire of their hearts, but that, since they had been baptized in their youths, they knew not whether there was any other baptism that might save them from such awful wickedness. Whereupon, San answered them, saying: 
85 It is written: Though your sins be scarlet, they shall be white as snow. Whereunto were you baptized in your youths? 
86 And Stephat answered him, saying: 
87 When we were but youths, our priests baptized us so that we might become members of Christ’s church. This was the token of membership in His kingdom according to the ways and customs of our people. I, for one, left the path of righteousness many years ago and I know not where my companions stand. Notwithstanding, we have been taught that there is but one baptism and one church. Can we now be baptized again, and if so, unto what church shall we be baptized, seeing that we have dedicated ourselves unto Christ? 
88 And San was pleased at this saying and answered Stephat, saying: 
89 Of a certainty, there is but one kingdom of God, but of churches there are many. For the churches are formed by men with a purpose to serve God and in this they do great good. And some believe one way while others believe another. But, if you wish to become pure and clean before Christ, you must make your covenant not with any church, but with Christ Himself. Wherefore, let me tell you of the custom of my people, for I believe it will help you to understand how you may become doers of the word and not hearers only. 
90 The Nem of Mentina, when they learn a great thing, or when they make a great commitment, they do go up to their holy men and women and ask them to baptize them again. And this is done not as token of membership in any church, but as token of the gratitude they feel because of the great thing that the Spirit has taught them, or in token of the new covenant they are willing to make with the Lord. This is not done but once and for all, but many times throughout the life of the believer. In this way do the Nem renew their covenants and their commitments unto the Lord their God. In this way do the Nem remain cleansed and purified from the blood and sin of this generation. 
91 Now, this baptism is done either in the fashion of the Sons of Ammon in token of the sacrifice of the Son, or it is done by burial in water in token of the Lord’s own baptism as has been revealed by the prophets. 
92 And behold, when the seven companions had heard these things they were gladdened in their hearts. For, they knew that their sins were as scarlet and they desired them to be washed away. And they had repented of their sins, but they still felt keenly the effects of them. Wherefore, they begged San to stand as Peli for them, that they might make a token of their dedication to the Lord. And San assisted them in building the Lodge and in performing the purification of the Ammonites and they made a purifying sacrifice before the Lord. 
93 And when they had completed this sacrifice, whereby they emulated their Savior in the sacrifice which He was to give for the sake of all living, they went even unto Himneth and begged of her that she might baptize them in water. And, seeing the sincerity of their repentance, and also being moved upon by the Holy Ghost, she did consent to act as Peli for them in the performing of the ordinance of the baptism of the Lord’s burial. 
94 Wherefore, the seven companions guided them unto a river wherein there was much water. And Himneth took them one by one by the hand and, going down into the water with them, she did baptize them each in turn. 
95 And these are the words she did raise up unto the Lord when she did baptize the seven companions, for, she did speak as the Spirit directed, saying: 
96 Holy Father which is in Heaven, look upon us now. For we do raise up a song of thanksgiving for all that you have given us. And we do especially thank you for the sacrifice of your Son. Now take this – and she spoke the name of the individual – even into a covenant by this washing in token of the repentance he has dedicated unto you. Wherefore, having authority given of me by the Mother, and having received a commission of Jesus Christ, and also having a confirmation of that commission by the power of the Holy Ghost, I do baptize you – and she spoke again the name of the individual – in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen. 
97 And when she had spoken these words, she lowered them into the water, even to the covering of their entire body. And behold, when she raised them again out of the water, she was filled with the Holy Ghost and she did pronounce a blessing upon them, insomuch that the Spirit did come in unto them and they did speak in the tongues of angels and they did also prophesy many great things. 
98 And behold, when these things were done, San did also lay hands upon them and pronounce them Nem of his own family. 
99 And when all this was accomplished they gathered up their belongings and continued upon their journey. And behold, in every city and village they entered, they preached the Gospel of Peace unto the people and there were many who believed on their words, and also many who did not. But, in none of the cities and villages wherein they did minister were they abused in any way until they reached the City of Gad. 


CHAPTER 6 
1 Now, it was unto the City of Gad that Shigath, the brother of San and Himneth had made his journey when the brethren of Oug separated themselves from each other. And behold, Gad was an exceedingly wicked city. 
2 And when Shigath entered the city through the gate thereof the Spirit spoke to him, saying: 
3 Shigath, testify against this city. For, there is not one righteous soul in it and, surely, the Lord will smite every inhabitant of it. 
4 And behold, it was even as the Spirit gave witness unto Shigath. For, as he made his way through the streets of the city, the little children seeing him did begin to follow with taunting and mocking. And the youths took up stones to throw at him and staves they took into their hands with which to beat him. And, ere he had progressed far into the city, a great multitude gathered and ushered him with violence into the very center of the city. And, when they had reached the center of the city, they threw him to the ground and beat him brutally. 
5 And behold, this was before he had even opened his mouth to speak to anyone. Wherefore, it was as the Spirit testified to him. Verily, the City of Gad was a City of vipers. 
6 Wherefore, when he could raise himself up again from the ground, he did also raise up his hands unto the Lord and he did pray a mighty prayer unto his God for deliverance from the people. And these are the words which he spoke in the hearing of all the people: 
7 Oh God! Hear now the voice of your servant. Yea, hearken unto me, Father. For, I have come into this city upon Your errand to preach repentance and salvation unto this people. But, before any word had proceeded out of my mouth, the people, young and old, did take up their stones and their staves to beat me. And they did set upon me with violence. Wherefore, I do give thanks unto You, Father, that You did see fit to send me even into this evil city, that I, by the power of the Holy Ghost, might prophesy against it for Your Son’s sake. 
8 For I know that He is come into the world even now and shall take up His cross. And if it be my cross that I shall be cast to the earth and even beaten unto death in this place, I shall still raise up my voice in thanksgiving for the knowledge that I have of the saving grace of my Redeemer. 
9 Wherefore, Father, look upon me now. I do not ask to be delivered from the multitude of this sinful city, for I would be even as my Savior, if it be that You do ask it of me. And behold, if I may sacrifice my life for the sake of Him who is mighty to save, then I shall esteem myself blessed forever and ever. 
10 And behold, when the multitude heard his words, for he spoke with the power of the Holy Ghost and they did pierce them as with arrows, they did pull back from him and they ceased to lay hold upon him and to beat him. And, seeing this, Shigath was strengthened and he continued, saying: 
11 Yea, Father, hear my voice! For, I came into this city to testify of the Christ, and behold, before even I had opened my mouth they have sought to take away my life. But I do raise up my heart and my soul unto You with thanksgiving. For, even if my life is taken this day at the hands of evil men, I shall raise up my voice in praise of my God and in thanks for all wherein He does bless me. For behold, if I do lose my life in testifying of the Christ, it shall be an honor unto me and I shall rejoice in it. For Jesus is a worthy name to take even unto death! 
12 And when he had said this, one man stood forth and spoke evil words against him, saying: 
13 Behold, it is even as I have told you. This is one like unto he who came even unto my own city. Yea, one such as he, in the same apparel and speaking with the same strangeness, did come into the City of Laman and testified against us. And some there were that believed on his words but they are all dead or cast out of the city. Believe me, you people of Gad, this one is a trouble maker just as that other and you should do unto him as we did unto his brother. 
14 For, he will testify against you because of your riches and because that you are elevated above all that is common in the land. Do not let him speak, for they who are not of your distinction shall find reason to rise up against you because of his words. Yea, they will feel justified because of his teaching to kill you and take away all that you possess. And behold, they who are common shall take possession of your women and children to make slaves of them. I say unto you, Do not listen unto this man nor let him speak. For, all his words will speak evil concerning you and this city. Yea, call upon the guard of the city to take this man and kill him. If you do not, you will be sorry. For, the poor will have occasion in him to rise against you. And after this manner did he speak against Shigath unto the people of Gad to incite them to take away his life. 
15 But Shigath did but look upon him and answered him not, but smiled on him and prayed again unto the Father, saying: 
16 Oh great Father which is in Heaven. I forgive this man for the evil words which he has spoken against me. For, how can he know that I am like unto some other man who has come into the land. Yea, he knows nothing of what he speaks and does testify to me unto this people without knowledge. Wherefore, I do forgive him his words. And behold, if the multitude does take away my life because of the words which he has spoken in his ignorance, I do forgive him of it also. For, if they do take away my life, it shall be because I do lift up my voice unto heaven and testify of the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. 
17 And yet another man stood forth and spoke unto the multitude, saying: 
18 Hold, my brethren. For you know not what this man is. Shall we take away a man’s life upon the rumor? I say unto you, Let us rightly examine this man to see if there be any truth in the rumor or no. Then let us do unto him as seems us right according to our law and our custom. But, can we act now upon the words of one man against another? I say unto you, It must be admitted that our ways are not the same as all the cities in this land, for we are more blessed than they all. But, can it be said that we have left the path laid out for us by our law? Wherefore, let us take this man and examine him straitly. 
19 And the multitude were in accord, for the words of Shigath had filled them with dread. But behold, they were also filled with anger. For, they had heard of the preaching of a new prophet in the City of Laman and they desired not any preaching of the sort in their city. Wherefore, they took Shigath and they bound him by the hands and set a rod to span his arms, that he had not the liberty to use them and stopped his mouth that he could not speak. And behold, they caused that he should walk thus bound and gagged through the midst of the throng even up to the place where the Chief Judge of the city did sit to hear the complaints of higher magnitude. And there, before the judge, they did cast him down before the judge, and he was made low before the majesty of him they had elevated to a high position. 
20 And the judge, having been apprised of the complaint against Shigath, saw that the multitude was against him in spirit and he spoke to the multitude, saying: 
21 Who shall speak for this man? And none came forward. And he continued, saying: 
22 Then let his gag be removed. 
23 And when this was done, the multitude cried out and a great clamor rose up from them that the judge should not let the man speak, for his words would be nothing but evil concerning the people of Gad. But he raised his hand and called in the guard to quiet the people. And when the people were all quieted again, he made inquiry of witnesses as to what evil the man had spoken. And, looking down upon the accused, he asked him: 
24 What have you testified before this people that has made them rise up so? What evil have you professed that they should wish me to cast you into prison or take away your life? Speak truly, for I am a servant of the people and shall know if you lie. And Shigath answered him, saying: 
25 Behold, of a surety I have not testified ought of these people, nor of your city. I did but enter into the city and was immediately set upon. And I had not crossed one street but that the people of this city did take me and beat me and take hold of me to take away my life. 
26 And the judge answered him, saying: 
27 Surely this people shall not have done this thing without some provocation. What are you and where do you come from? For, I see that your raiment is course and of a kind the commoners wear. And every citizen of this city knows our law – that no common man may enter the city without his master to guide him and speak for him. For behold, we are a chosen people and God has elevated us above the common folk. Wherefore, they live in a common way without the city, and we, being elevated above them, live with distinction within it. Wherefore, who are you, that you should breach the peace and the law of our city thus, coming into the gate dressed as you are in the rags of the common man? 
28 And Shigath answered him, saying: 
29 I am Shigath, the son of Sanempet, who is the high priest of the City of Mentina of the Nem. I am the same as any citizen of that city and my raiment is that which I choose, as a free man, to wear. I know not if I am common, but that I am a free citizen of a free city, the son of a free man and slave of no man. 
30 Now hearing this, the judge became concerned. For, it was also in their law that no free man should stand bound before the judgment seat and, in this, he perceived that he had erred. Wherefore, he commanded that Shigath be loosed from his bonds and he continued his examination, saying: 
31 You will forgive the rashness of the good people of our city. For, we have heard rumors of strange prophets in the land who come into the cities and make havoc among the common and the poor. I say unto you, whoever you are, You shall not have the liberty to do this in our city, if you be such a one. 
32 Now, you have declared yourself to be a free man from a free city and the son of a free man. If you be no slave to any man, answer me in this: Why do you choose to attire yourself as a slave? 
33 And Shigath answered him, saying: 
34 In my city there is no slave, but all are free men and women. 
35 And the judge answered: 
36 Yea, we know of this law. For, in our city also there is no slave and all are free men. Behold, this is our law, that no slave or common man may come into the city. Wherefore, we are free within the city walls of the rabble of the poor. But look you, we are distinct from the rabble by our mode of dress. It is easy to know who is rich and who is poor, who is bond and who is free, by that distinction. 
37 And Shigath answered him: 
38 Nay, it is not so in Mentina, nor in any city in the Land Northward. For, all men and women are free and there are no poor. No one has the ownership of any other person at all, for we have all things in common, even as we have been taught by our prophets and from on high. In Mentina, there is no city wall and there is not one slave in all the land. 
39 And the judge answered: 
40 Now I understand then why you attire yourself as a common man. It is clear to me that all are equally common in your land and in your city. Wherefore, I judge that you lie when you say that you are a free man, the son of a free man, and no man’s bondservant. For, you are all slaves one to another. 
41 Whereupon, the judge caused that the guards bind again the hands of Shigath, and they cast him down upon the floor before the judgment seat. And the judge continued, saying: 
42 I declare that this man is common and may not address us in this seat. Who will stand forward to speak for this man? Who was the man who insisted that he be examined? Let him stand forth. 
43 And the man’s name was Cishem and he did stand forth to advocate for Shigath, saying: 
44 I am Cishem, a free man of this city, and it is I who insisted that this man be brought before the judge to be examined according to our law. But behold, I do not speak for him, nor shall I, for I know not what he is nor what is crime in him, except that he has come into the city ignorant of our statutes, in the raiment of a common man. 
45 And the judge continued, saying: 
46 Very well then. Let him be examined. Tell me, Cishem, did you listen to any of this man’s words when he was rightly apprehended by the people? 
47 And Cishem answered him: 
48 Yes, I did hear him. He lifted up his voice in prayer to his God giving thanks that he had been delivered into the hands of this people. He thanked God that he might be killed in the name of one Jesus, of whom this people have heard before. Yea, he thanked his God that he might be chosen to give up his life in this name. 
49 And the judge continued: 
50 This is strange indeed. Do you mean that he spoke no words of prophecy or condemnation of our city or of our people. 
51 Nay. He spoke no such words in my hearing, but gave thanks only that God would so treat him. 
52 And the judge continued: 
53 There is nothing in our law that prevents any man, be he free or bond, from praying to his God. Therefore, I can find no fault in him in this. Who, therefore, has made accusation against him? Let him stand forward and be heard. 
54 But behold, the man would not stand forward, for he knew that he was a stranger in the city as well and that he had spoken against Shigath in rumor only. Wherefore, not knowing the laws of the city himself, he refused to stand forth, but retired quickly out of the city. Wherefore, the judge continued in his examination: 
55 We have heard of this Jesus Christ who is so prominently taught in other cities in this land, but the people have unanimously rejected this teaching. We do not believe that God shall come down from His place of eminence and live upon the earth as has been taught. Indeed, such a teaching we know to be foolishness. Behold, what man, having attained his distinction, does go down in among the commoners to be as they are and live as they do? We cannot believe it of God, nor even of the Son of God. 
56 We believe that God has given us our eminence and that it would be a dishonor to Him for us to condescend to go down out of the city to go to and from among them who have no distinction. How then, shall we believe that the very Son of God shall come in the form of man, He being a very eternal God, and walk among us as a common man? 
57 Wherefore, since testimony has been given that you gave thanks to your strange God that you might be so honored as to give up your life in the name of this Jesus, I perceive that you are of this same cult. Is it of this Jesus that you wish to teach, and is it for this purpose that you have come into our city? 
58 And Shigath answered him, saying: 59 Yea, it is as you say. 
60 And he was about to testify more, but one of the guards who had bound him and cast him to the floor struck him suddenly with a staff and commanded him to shut up his mouth. 
61 And the judge continued: 
62 Then, by the testimony of his own mouth, this man has condemned himself. For, even as we have cast out and even put to death all they who have come into our city preaching lies about this commoner, Jesus, who is supposedly to come unto all the poor and elevate to the kingdom of heaven, we must also judge this foreigner in like manner. 
63 Now, because that he is not of this city, I cannot pronounce death upon him. But, it is my decree that he be purged and smitten, that he be stripped naked and beaten, that the soles of his feet be burned, that he be bound up again and that he be cast out of the city. Let him find comfort from those who would give comfort to the slave who is cast off. 
64 And Shigath was gagged and a staff was set to span his arms that he had not the liberty of them. And he was stripped naked before the multitude. And the guard who had cast him to the floor stepped forward and beat him with the lash until his flesh did brake forth and he bled. And vinegar was cast upon his wounds and salt. And when all this was done unto him, the guards raised him to his feet and he was made to walk through the throng even to the gate of the city. And he was cast down upon the ground outside the city, bound and gagged, and the guards returned into the city and closed the gate upon him. 
65 Thus was Shigath cast out of the City of Gad and thus was he found in a lowly and abandoned state by his brother, his sister and the seven companions, having at that moment arrived at the gate. 
66 And behold, they watched with horror as the scene unfolded before them. For, they saw only that a wretch had been cast down naked by the side of the road and that he was beaten and scourged and barely sensible. 
67 And they did approach the wretch quickly and Phez, who had been a judge in his own city before the day of his repentance, took off of him his own cloak and placed it upon Shigath and Hemset anointed his wounds with precious oil. And they raised him up and carried him away to a safe place to minister unto him. 
68 And behold, when they had washed him and ministered to him, San saw that he was his brother and Himneth fell upon his neck and kissed him and he revived and beheld his relations. And Shigath cried in his anguish for the people of Gad, but San was filled with a righteous indignation. 
69 And he left Himneth, Hemset, and Korim with Shigath to care for him and went forth with his companions to testify against the city. And behold, because that Stephat and Nepham were attired as captains of the gate and Phez was richly attired, the guards at the gate gave them leave to enter. And they went straightway unto the place of judgment, and behold, the judge still sat upon the seat. And San spoke boldly as they entered into the place of judgment, saying: 
70 Who is it that has judged my brother in this place, and has beaten him, and scourged him, and in all ways made a hiss and a shame of him, and cast him desolate upon the ground still bound and helpless? Who is it that has done this un-manful thing unto a fellow creature? Let me know this man’s name and let me see his face. For, I know not the customs and the ways of this place, being a foreigner, but I would take the measure of such a creature, that I might know against whom I shall testify in this place. 
71 And the judge, hearing the bold words of San, stood forth and answered him, saying: 
72 I am Pahorat, Chief Judge of the City of Gad. It is I and none other who has pronounced right judgment upon the beggar Shigath who came into this righteous city claiming noble birth with lies, and praising God that he should be allowed to die in the name of a false Christ. This is according to the will of the people and our law. Who are you, that you should approach this seat of judgment so brazenly? But look! By your attire I perceive that you are also of this same ilk. 
73 And Phez answered him. Now, Phez knew the laws and customs of the cities in this part of the Land Southward and stood forth to speak on behalf of the foreigners, saying: 
74 Not so, Pahorat. I am Phez and was a Judge in the City of Josh. You speak unwisely of these men. Indeed, I may say that you speak without knowledge. I am this man’s companion and I advocate for him. I am this man’s companion and his advocate. We come as a body of men who say the same and claim the same. We speak and act together in this thing and we would have our answer. For, a man has been beaten and scourged and cast out of the city bound that he might perish. For what cause was he handled thus? 
75 And Pahorat answered him, saying: 
76 The man first came up to this judgment seat attired as a beggar. By our law, none such may even enter our city without proper escort. We do not excuse ourselves, for, this is our law. Let all who enter our city know it. 
77 And Phez answered him, saying: 
78 Was this man, who was obviously a foreigner, appraised of this law? Let him who told the man about the law, or let him who stretched forth his hand to him to prevent him entering the city in error come forward. Was there none at the gate? None in the streets of the city? And whoso first took hold of him, did he not instruct the man of his error? Is there no such procedure in your law? 
79 And Pahorat answered him, saying: 
80 We are not isolated among the cities. We have commerce with all. Of course there is such a provision in the law. 
81 And Phez answered him: 
82 I know that there is such a provision, for, I know that there are many merchants in the City of Laman who do business with this city. Behold, I have never heard of any of them, or of their servants and bondservants, handled in such a way. Wherefore, since it is according to your law that the stranger be informed of it, let he who did instruct this stranger come forward and make an account of it. 
83 And Pahorat said unto him: 
84 There is no such man or woman. None was needed. For, no sooner had he been brought into our presence before this seat did he begin to testify of this Christ who is to come. Wherefore, we knew him to be of a dangerous set of slaves who have attempted to rise up against their rightful masters. Yea, I myself heard him speak of this same Jesus. Wherefore, I did rightly pronounce judgment upon him quickly, that his words mayn’t take any effect upon the people. For, I know this doctrine to be a pernicious thing among they who are not of distinction. 
85 And Phez continued: 
86 Tell me, did he at any time preach of the coming of this Jesus? Or did he at any time call any to repentance? For, all that has been reported of him is that he gave thanks to his God that he might suffer death in the name of Christ. 
87 And Pahorat said: 
88 It is so. But behold, that is all I needed to hear to know that this man was dangerous. But look, do you now advocate for this San, the brother of him against whom I have passed judgment, or do you advocate in favor of this Christ? For, I shall judge you too, if either be certain. 
89 And Phez said: 
90 I do advocate for both. But behold, you shall not treat with me as you did this poor man. Nay, you shall not bind me and beat me. You shall not purge me with the lash, nor anoint my wounds with vinegar and salt. I know the law of this city and of all the cities round about. You shall not treat me as a slave or beggar. 
91 And behold, Pahorat knew that Phez spoke the truth and that he did know the law. Wherefore, fearing that his judgment against a judge of a neighbor city might bring about a contention between the two, he deferred his inquiry of Phez. But Phez did continue, saying: 
92 Of a surety, you have judged this man rightly, in that he is a stranger who knows not the customs of the land. And you do judge him rightly, in that he is a servant of this Christ, of whom we have all heard from time to time all the days of our lives. But, I ask you, if this man attempted to convince no man to believe in this Christ, you did judge him wrongfully. For, the law of this city does not attempt to govern a man’s private thoughts and beliefs. 
93 And behold, even if he had attempted to convince you of the merits of his beliefs, it is the law of this city to set such a one outside the city wall with a few stripes and an admonition. But you beat him and scourged him and then you did set him without the wall bound and marked so that any who might find him might know that the onus of the judgment seat lay upon him. And thus you left him to die without succor. Surely, you sentenced this man to death wrongfully, and now do you wonder that his brother comes inquiring as to the reason? 
94 I know also that it is contrary to the law of this city to lay hold upon any man, be he bond or free, poor or of that distinction set upon him by riches and much property, to take away his life without due cause. Now behold, according to the law, you had no such cause in this man. Wherefore did you handle him in so unlawful a manner? 
95 And Pahorat answered him, saying: 
96 Behold, we have had word of such men in the City of Laman, who come into among the people and testify against their ways and customs. We want no such men among us. Wherefore, I did pass judgment upon this man as an example to others who might think to do unto us as they have done unto other cities round about. And behold, the wild places are full of these men who have come out of the City of Laman. Shall they all come into our city and testify against us because they are cast out of their own? Let them testify against their own city. 
97 And Phez said unto him: 
98 Then I do condemn you before the law, Pahorat of the High Seat of the City of Josh. For, you have not gained your seat that you might controvert and change the law, but to prosecute and enforce it, that law which is established by they unto whom the people have given this power. Or am I mistaken in the notion that the law is made by the consent of its citizens? And have you taken upon yourself to become a King unto this city, to make its laws irrespective of the sentiments of its subjects? 
99 And behold, these words of Phez began to stir up the hearts of the people who stood round about the judgment seat. For, the people of the City of Josh were puffed up in the pride of their hearts and wanted no King to rule over them. And behold, they considered the judges to be their servants. Wherefore, the words of Phez did stir them up against Pahorat because they did call to their attention how he had not followed the law which had been given him. 
100 And the news quickly went out from the place of judgment of how Pahorat had attempted to set aside the law of the city and make himself King and a multitude began to gather to the place. 
101 And Pahorat did fear for himself and did rise up out of the judgment seat and stood forth on his feet to speak, saying: 
102 Now behold, this man has condemned me before the law and I do now stand as one man accused before this judgment seat and not the judge of it. And I do speak to defend myself before this people. 
103 Behold, I do not wish to be King, but only to preserve the ways and customs of my people. I know that the laws made by this people are for the good of all those who have such as is required to be called with distinction to rule over all the others who live round about. It is because that God has called us to this calling, and has set His seal upon the calling by giving us riches where other men have not, that we feel qualified to rule. Wherefore, since I have obtained this distinction among men in great measure, the people have chosen me to sit in judgment over causes of great matter. And I do esteem their having called upon me to do this work for them as confidence in my judgment. Wherefore, I do not attempt to remake the law, but to anticipate the will of the people. 
104 And behold, I have removed myself from the seat of judgment to defend my own actions. And there is no judge in the seat. Wherefore, I do call upon all the people gathered here to act as High Judge for the people. And I do make an inquiry of this man who makes advocacy for these foreigners. 
105 Behold, do you believe in this Jesus Christ, of whom this man has testified? Or do you also serve this false master of whom other false prophets have testified? 
106 And Phez answered him: 
107 Yea, I do believe on Him and I do testify of Him. Behold, I was of high rank among my own people and my own city, and I did pass judgment upon all according to our law. And I did puff myself up as you have done because my neighbor had less than I. And I did justify myself in not giving of my considerable substance unto the beggar because he had brought upon himself his lowly state. Yea, I did rationalize my lack of charity, and even my cruelty, because I believed that the Lord had qualified me. Yea, I did answer to all the qualifications established by my people to act as judge for them. 
108 And behold, I did also seek to take away the life of one of these false prophets, as you say. But, when I did stretch out my hand to smite the man, even this same brother of he whom you have scourged, behold, I was smitten and cast down to the earth. But I say unto you, It was not by the hand of this man that I was cast down, but by the power of the Spirit which was in him. 
109 And when I was thus smitten and cast down unto the earth, I did pass from before men as one who is dead. And I was taken into a place wherein I might be judged of my works. And One sat upon a judgment seat before me and examined my mind and my heart. But He did not examine me with vain words. Nay, He looked upon me and knew my thoughts, and He looked into me and knew my heart and my intentions. 
110 Behold, this same who examined me and knew me without a word is Jesus Christ who will come. And He did fill my mind with a clearer understanding of my own wickedness. And, when He had shown me all my deeds and thoughts, He revealed to me the awful state of those who, seeing what I had seen, refuse to repent and go on to that futurity which awaits the wicked. And behold, my soul was wracked with the knowledge that I must remain in eternity, not in the state of bliss afforded by that worthiness that I assumed the blessings of my earthly prosperity gave ample proof, but rather in an awful state of unending woe and misery. Do not attempt to imagine my agony, for you cannot perceive of such things and remain in the body. 
111 Wherefore, I did cry out unto the Lord before whom I knelt, that I might be given opportunity to repent of my wickedness and return at some later date before that same judgment seat to be examined again, perchance a different outcome might befall me. 
112 Now, I know not if anything I may do in this life can overcome the immensity of my crimes, but I know this – I shall not wish to entertain that great Lord again in His great wrath. But rather, I would kneel before Him and beg His forgiveness, hoping that what I do henceforth may have some effect upon His judgment. 
113 Now behold, He did grant my desire, wherefore, I do testify not only of my belief in the words of these men, but also that I have seen the face of this Jesus Christ. Yea, I declare unto you that He is not a false Christ, as you flatter yourself in styling Him, and these are not false prophets. And I admonish you to hearken unto their words. 
114 Now behold, when Phez had finished speaking in this manner, the people were all taken aback by the things which he had spoken. And even Pahorat was also abashed. But he was also wounded in his pride because of the things which Phez had testified, and also afraid that he might be taken in some offense. Wherefore, he did press forward with his suit, saying: 
115 Behold, you have at last answered my question. Yea, in the hearing of all the people, you have declared that you are also for this Christ, the teaching of whom this people have condemned. And if, as you say, you come as a body of men to advocate for these heathen from the north, then you also are all alike convicted of your testament of this false Christ. 
116 And behold, the people are all responsible for this law which does dictate that all who profess this Christ shall be cast out of the city. Wherefore, I am justified in demanding that you all be removed from this place and cast out, for, you are all of the same molding and we can only expect the same language from you all. 
117 And behold, the people all cried out in one voice in favor of the demand. For, although they wished no king to rule over them, they also knew that they had condoned a law that testified against them and they wished no further exposure to prophets who condemned for the distinction which they enjoyed over their fellow men. Wherefore, they cried mightily that the men be cast out of the city. 
118 But behold, once again San stretched forth his hand before them that sought to take hold of them and cried: 
119 Nay, touch us not! For we are all filled with that Holy Ghost of which Phez spoke. And behold, though he realize it not, and believe it not, he is forgiven of his sins and stands blameless before God this day because of the testimony he has given of His Son. Stretch not forth your hands to take hold of any of us. For, in the moment that you do, the Lord will smite you from on high. 
120 And the people did not heed the words of San and did proceed to rush upon the men to take hold of them in order that they might cast them out from among their midst. And there was a great tumult in the place of judgment and a great multitude rushed forward upon the little band of prophets to take hold of them. But behold, they could not. 
121 And the mob did begin to contend with one another with their fists in competition over who might actually lay hold of the men, but none could, and they began mightily to contend one with another in great confusion. And, when all was in confusion and all the host was contenting one with another, there was a great sound and a rush of commotion. And behold, all the people fell to their knees and then upon their faces, excepting Pahorat, the Chief Judge of the City of Gad. 
122 And when all was quiet, San lifted up his voice again to Pahorat, to prophesy against him, saying: 
123 Behold, you have testified against us and caused that we be cast out from among the people of Gad. Yea, you have lifted up a testimony most false before the face of the only real Judge in the Universe. Do you suppose that your life in this city is worth anything? Do you suppose that any of your wealth or your costly things can buy you distinction now? 
124 For behold, the tale will go forth that the prophets of God were set upon by a great multitude in the City of Gad at the instigation of the Chief Judge. And the story will go forth that a great multitude of men, even hundreds, could not subdue the prophets and all were cast down to the earth – all excepting the Chief Judge. And you will be esteemed the cause of all this mischief. 
125 And behold, can you imagine that all they who have been cast down this day for attempting to do exactly that which Phez and indeed all these my companions attempted to do, will not now go to that same place and experience all that befell each of these? What will be their opinion of you when they do return unto their senses? 
126 Behold, I say unto you, There will be some who continue in their wicked ways who will seek to take away your seat and your life because they saw not you also kneeling before that great Judge. Will they support you now, oh Chief Judge of the City of Gad? 
127 And what of those who shall repent as these men have repented? What? Will you have all these prostrate men put to the sword, that you need not risk some of them going forth and testifying of the Christ? 
128 For, He does now live even as you and I live. Yea, He is a reality which you must face. He has promised to come even here into our part of the world, for He redeems His people. But, shall He redeem you? 
129 And behold, the place began again to fill with yet more people. And they looked upon all they who had fallen and wondered. And it was as San had prophesied, they did look up even unto Pahorat and were amazed. For, of all the men of the city assembled, he was the only one who had not been smitten even to the ground. Yea, he stood upon his own feet and had not fallen as if dead. 
130 And San spoke unto them, saying: 
131 Behold, the Lord has smitten all these men because of the action of this same you see before you. Yea, even he who is chief among you has brought upon this city misery so great that it cannot be expressed. For, because of the wickedness of this city and of this people, when the Lord does come even unto this country to redeem His own, the City of Gad shall burn and every soul in it. Thus has the Spirit spoken unto me that I should say unto this people, and thus shall be the fate of all who repent not and remain in the City of Gad. 
132 Wherefore, repent and leave this place. For, the Lord has spoken against it for the wickedness which is in it. 
133 And, when he had pronounced these things, San and his companions strode out of the city unmolested. For, none dared assail them and all were amazed at them. 


CHAPTER 7 
1 And the companions of San did inquire of him, and Stephat, who was captain of the gate in the City of Josh, spoke for them, saying: 
2 Of a surety, the Lord is with you, San. For, even when you are in your wrath, you do great miracles. For, who can deny that the mob would have laid hands on us and taken away our lives were it not for the power that is in you. 
3 And San said unto him: 
4 Do not think that ought that I do is of me, or that it is by any power in me that these things are done. Behold, in my own home I am a simple farmer and I grow fruit for the tables of my family and my neighbors. The things which I say and do are only those things wherein the Spirit prompts me. 
5 And Stephat was astonished at San and pressed him, saying: 
6 How does one know what to say and do? Does the Spirit manifest such things in certain ways? For, I too felt a great thing in my heart, or I shall say, in my entire being when I heard your words, and I am sure that the people felt the same thing. For behold, we were all alike amazed. But, how do you know what the Spirit prompts as opposed to that which comes of your own emotion? 
7 For, I know that the warrior who goes into battle must stir up the emotion in his heart in order that he might do that which is necessary for him. And it is a great part of the training of the warrior to know how to control and to use his wrath in the heat of battle. 
8 And San answered him, saying: 
9 Nay, the Spirit usually leaves one alone in their ire. But behold, the Lord did call me to go forth and preach unto my brethren in the Land Southward, and I was instructed to go even unto the more wicked and proud portion of the land. Wherefore, my Lord, knowing my character well, preserves me even in my wrath. And the Spirit does confirm in my mind and my bosom the things that I must do. For, even in the midst of my righteous indignation, for who can deny that the things done to my sister and my brother ought to give rise to such, I felt a peace come upon me suddenly in the moment that I was to speak. And that peace springing up from within my bosom, is the manifestation which the Spirit has used in me from my youth to teach me and instruct me and testify to me of truth. Wherefore, I knew that the words were not the imaginings of my heart, but verily, the words of God. 
10 Behold, as you become more accustomed to the workings of the Spirit, you will recognize the ways in which He does manifest Himself in you. It may be different than the way in which He does manifest unto me, but you will know it. And, when the Holy Ghost confirms a thing in you, see that you always hearken unto it. For, to deny the Holy Ghost is a perilous thing. 
11 And Stephat said unto him: 
12 I think I have experienced this thing. For, when I knelt before the Lord, yea, when I prostrated myself before the judgment seat of the Lord, I felt a great welling up inside of me that seemed to fill my whole being. And when He did proclaim to me who He was and showed me all my sins, I knew without doubt that the things He said were true and that He is the very Creator and Savior. This is the thing that I cannot deny, for my soul cries out with it from every fiber. Is this the manifestation of the Spirit? 
13 And San answered him, saying: 
14 Yea. This is the beginning of the unspeakable gift which only God may give, even the Gift of the Holy Ghost. Rejoice in it this day, for you now know of a surety the manner in which the Holy Ghost does work in you. Wherefore, whereas I feel a peace deep within me, you feel a powerful welling up and every fiber cries out. When you feel this manifestation, see that you do the thing that comes into your mind and see that you speak the words that form there. For, the things that come to you under the influence of the Holy Ghost are the very things that the Lord would do, were He here to do them. Yea, in that moment, you become the Arm and the Mouth of the Lord God. Would that the Holy Ghost could make arms and mouths of us all, but the wicked do prevent it. 
15 And Phez did also open his mouth to speak, saying: 
16 It is with me even as Stephat has expressed. When I did begin to examine the Pahorat I did begin in the manner of all legalists. But behold, I felt as if it were someone else that was speaking. I felt as if I were merely a bystander listening to my own voice, but the words belonged to another. And behold, I knew the direction of the speaking and the desired end, but I felt as if some other person was pleading the case instead of me. 
17 And San praised him, saying: 
18 Rejoice, Phez, for you too have felt how the Spirit does foreknow our talents and abilities and use them to the Lord’s purposes. Behold, when you did advocate for us before the judge, it was the Lord who was our advocate through you. 
19 And San continued to teach them along the way, saying: 
20 Take heed to the promptings of the Holy Ghost. For, He is not as you and I, nor even like unto our Father which is in Heaven. Nay, nor even like unto the Savior, who lives even now in the Land of Jerusalem. Behold, He is a personage of Spirit and has not a body of flesh nor of bone. His substance is not tangible to any who live in the physical world, but is discernible only by the living spirit within each of us. His voice is not heard by the ears of our body, but by the ears of our spirits. Behold, this is why we feel His influence more than we see or hear Him. 
21 And many prophets have described His influence as a still, small voice. But the Nem, being Healers, know that to hear a voice with the ears of our bodies it cannot be still, for, it is the movement of the sound that causes us to hear. Yea, it is the movement of one matter upon another that brings about the physical hearing. Wherefore, the voice of the Holy Ghost cannot be as the voice of our bodies, for else, it could not be still. 
22 And we also know that the voice of the Spirit does break upon all the matter within us, and even upon the matter surrounding us. Wherefore, we know that the voice of the Holy Ghost is not small. But, I ask you, how does one describe so great a thing? The still, small voice is figurative for me because the Spirit does speak like thunder unto me. 
23 And when the Holy Ghost does begin to manifest Himself unto you, He does transmit the actual thoughts and feelings of the Lord unto every particle of you. Behold, this is the Endowment of Power that is peculiar to the Holy Ghost. Do not expect Him to manifest Himself unto you as an angel, for such is not His calling. But He will always manifest through the feelings of your own body, for it is the movement of His spiritual matter upon that which is spiritual within you that causes the sensations, just as the movement of matter upon matter causes you to be able to hear the words which I speak unto you. Behold, the laws that apply to both are similar laws and they are universal. 
24 And behold, when you exercise that which is spiritual in you to the extent that you begin to walk and talk with the Holy Ghost in a sacred manner, that which is spiritual in you begins to overcome that which is purely physical. Then do the gifts of the Spirit begin to manifest in you also. Then may you speak with angels and in the tongue of angels. Then may you be introduced upon the Way and walk and talk with Heavenly Beings. And again, then you may begin to take up vipers and be harmed not by them. And then, by the word of your mouth, may you bless the sufferer and see them take up their bed and walk. Yea, then may you lay hands upon the deaf and they shall hear, and then may you lay hands upon the blind and they shall see. 
25 For this exercise causes the movement of that substance which is Christ’s that fills the Universe. Yea, and this exercise causes the spiritual matter within you to move upon the spiritual matter of creation. And when matter moves upon matter, be it spiritual or physical, this causes change. 
26 Or which of you have not set your hand to a stone to move it out of your way? Is it not the movement of the matter of your hand that causes the movement of the matter of the stone? And behold, does the ground beneath the stone remain the same? And does the stone not displace air as it moves? And the movement of all these things cause movement in many things more until it begins to become difficult to record all of the movement. 
27 Behold, thus is it with the movement of spiritual matter. And with each such swelling and movement of that which is spiritual within you, that which is spiritual in the Universe also swells and moves. 
28 And who of you, having begun to undertake a new task and exerting yourselves, do not feel the unfamiliarity of the muscles to the new task for a time? But, after a while, the task becomes familiar and the difficulty subsides. For, do you not become stronger and grow with each new task taken as you accustom yourselves to it? 
29 Behold, thus it is with that which is spiritual within you. As you learn and grow with the Holy Ghost as your guide, that which is spiritual within you grows stronger. And, if you are steady in your course, the spiritual body grows, even as your muscles grew in order that they might effectively handle the sword or build a house. Yea, the spirit within you grows and expands, even until it supersedes the physical. 
30 It is when this begins to take place that you are taken upon the Way and instructed by your grandfathers. Yea, for they have an interest in your success and will always assist you. And they have lived this life and have much to give you by way of instruction and experience. And, in this way is your heart turned to them and theirs to you. Yea, in this way are you introduced into the Terrestrial World while you are yet in the body, even as has been by the prophets. 
31 Wherefore, it behooves us all to continually experiment upon this faith, for it is that which holds sway in the Universe, even the substance of it. And behold, it is the movement of this substance that extends outward forever. Wherefore, what little you do in the spirit of peace here in this mortality, does progress and grow throughout all eternity. 
32 And behold, eternity is a great hoop. And all that you send out into it does grow and expand as it moves matter upon matter. And because it is a great eternal round, that which you send out into it does return again unto you greatly magnified. Wherefore, if there be some poor soul who suffers, and by the gift of the Spirit you relieve that suffering, behold, that working moves upon the expanse of creation to bring about a miracle in the sufferer, as also in you. And the power of the Holy Ghost does also expand upon that which you receive according to this law. 
33 Can you see then, how miracles take place in the lives of them who believe on the name of Christ and do continually seek to associate with Him through the Holy Ghost? And can you see how they who seek not that association seldom see miracles in their lives? It is not to be expected. For, it is only by the movement of the Light of Christ, which is that spiritual substance which fills the Universe and gives light and life unto the physical matter, that miracles take place. And behold, it is only he who can associate with the Holy Ghost who can make exercise upon this matter, even upon this faith. 
34 Now, I do not say that this is the only way in which the Holy Ghost may effect a miracle, for, He may do many things by intervention. Behold, this is how you were conveyed in your sinful state upon tthe Way, where the reality of Christ was made known unto you and your every sin was made manifest. But, I do say that miracles come as two outcomes. The first being that intervention which the Lord deems necessary, through the Holy Ghost. The other is by and through that association of matter of which I have spoken. 
35 And it was after this manner that San did teach his companions as they made their journey back to the place where they had left Shigath, Himneth and their companions. 
36 And behold, when they had returned unto the place, they found all well and ready to continue upon which the Lord had called them. And, after they had recounted all that had transpired in the City of Gad, they determined to pray to know which city to go to next. For, they knew that the Lord had not sent them into the Land Southward to testify unto all cities, only those that were among the most wicked. Wherefore, they did pray mightily unto the Lord to show them the direction they should travel. 
37 And the Lord did direct them to travel up into the City of Kishkumen, even that city which was the very capital of the Gadiantons in the Land Southward. 
38 Now, this was cause for some concern in the hearts of the seven companions, for, they knew of the city and that of all cities in the Land Southward, Kishkumen was known to be the vilest and most wicked of places. And they knew that the Nephites had often, in times past, attempted to root the Gadiantons from out of the land. But behold, every time that they regained their power in the land, it was from Kishkumen that their influence flowed. Wherefore, they were concerned that the prophets would wish to go into that region. Notwithstanding their fears, however, they had pledged themselves unto them and agreed to go up with them to the City of the Gadiantons. 
39 Now, Korim, who had been a slave in the City of Josh, and whose master had freed him and gave him leave to walk about the city in his name, he knew the ways of the Gadiantons, for he had somewhat to do with them in the past. For, since the day of his emancipation, he had made his way as a beggar before the people. Wherefore, he could watch from his lowly station the activities of the rich. And behold, he was also known unto some of the robbers and also he knew the way into the city. 
40 For, the City of Kishkumen was built up in a curious way, not like the other cities in the land. Behold, it was accessible only through a narrow ravine through which a river flowed. And the road into it was treacherous and crossed the river at many places. And also, if one knew not the exact entrance into the city itself, one might wander for days in the canyon and find nothing. But Korim had heard tell of the way into the city and thought he could guide them from the description he had heard. 
41 But behold, ere they even entered into the ravine itself, they were met by a party of men who were returning from their business and these men sought to rob them while they made their way. But Korim strode forth to meet them and speak with them, saying: 
42 Behold, I am Korim and I am a beggar of the City of Josh. I come with these, my companions, to deliver a message unto all the inhabitants of Kishkumen. Will you guide us up to the city? 
43 And the leader of the band of robbers answered him, saying: 
44 A beggar of Josh, that is high praise. There are not many who may lay claim to that title. Do you wish to join us in our stronghold, beggar Korim, and become one of us? 
45 And Korim answered him, saying: 
46 Nay, I am satisfied to work as I do, there are among my party who have important intelligence to give unto the rulers of this city concerning the Land Northward. Will you assist us, that they might deliver their message? 
47 Now, the Gadiantons were prevalent in the Land Southward. Yea, they were to be found in all the cities, and in most, there were their members placed in the seats of the lesser judges. Wherefore, all the land was plagued with the robbers and there was nowhere that was safe from them. Yea, they were the common scourge of the Land Southward. 
48 Wherefore, there was also much competition among the robbers themselves and they were always hungry for intelligence about other places from which to take their spoils. For, the robbers labored not to make their livings, but they stole what they needed and gained great wealth from theft. Wherefore, the prophets were escorted into the City of Kishkumen by a band of the Gadiantons. 
49 Now, this was difficult for the prophets. For, their father had gained great renown in the Land Northward in ferreting out the Gadiantons and preaching repentance unto them. And behold, all they who would not repent from their wickedness, and who would not covenant to leave the land after he had ferreted them out, he did put to death with the sword. For, the Gadiantons were wicked indeed, and Sanempet was determined that they should not in any way destroy the peace of the land. 
50 Wherefore, he was led by the Spirit to find them out and to make every attempt to convert them to the ways and customs of the Nem. And many there were who did repent and they became Nem, and behold, their children sit with us today in the temple. 
51 But, all those who would not convert or depart out of the land, Sanempet did challenge to battle, and the bands being emboldened that he was but one man did always take up his challenge. Wherefore, by the strength of his arm he did punish them, and by the strength and power of the Holy Ghost he did defeat them and put them to the sword. But behold, Sanempet had not as much need for this sort of strength as his father, Hagmeni, for the Spirit was strong in him, even to the convincing of most. 
52 Wherefore behold, the thought of entering into the great capital and chief City of the Gadiantons was strange to them indeed. And they proceeded into the city unmolested and unharmed, for their escort thought them to be of like character to themselves. 
53 And when they had entered through the secret way into the city, they saw Shimnet, even their own brother, standing upon a low wall crying repentance unto the people of the city as they passed by him. And behold, no one even looked up to hear his words and he was ignored by all. And, when they approached their brother and recognized him, and he them, they all embraced each other and rejoiced. 
54 But behold, the robbers who had been their guides looked on and pondered what they saw. For, Korim had told them that these people had intelligence from the Land Northward and they felt somewhat betrayed by him because they appeared now to be familiar with the lunatic who stood on the walls all the day long preaching of the destruction of their city. 
55 But they were not too surprised, and also perhaps a little pleased also. For, the beggar had by lies and artifice convinced them to escort them safely into their city. And this was the custom of the people of Kishkumen, that by stealth, lies and cunning, they made their livings. Wherefore, they did respect Korim at least for his cunning in deceiving them. And by this artifice the party did find favor, at least to some small degree, in the eyes of their guides who laughed at each other and at themselves because of the deception. 
56 And they determined among themselves that it would be foolishness to take these people up to the rulers of the city, for there was no profit in it for them. Wherefore, they left them standing with their brother in the streets of Kishkumen. 
57 And behold, this was according to their custom with regard to those who were of not great risk or threat to the city. For, the city was exceedingly difficult to assail by any body of men, but easy to access by any that was small enough to pass through along the secret way. Wherefore, the city was open to any who was able to find their way into it, but closed to any army wishing to assail it. For, the way in was steep and narrow and only wide enough for one man to pass in many places. And, because of this, no army could enter the city, for, even a small party of men could defend it against thousands. 
58 Now, when the brethren of Oug found themselves once again together, they embraced each other and rejoiced. And Shimnet took them to a small home which he had acquired and used for shelter during his stay in Kishkumen. And when the party was made comfortable, they informed Shimnet of all that had happened unto them in the cities where they had testified. 
59 And behold, when he related his story and made his report, they were all astonished. For, they believed that a prophet in this, the most wicked of cities in the land, must not be received with any favor at all by the people. But Shimnet told a tale not of favor and acceptance, but that the people completely ignored him and his teaching. And this did astonish the party. And Shimnet inquired of them, saying: 
60 I am alike astonished and amazed as you are by my tale. For, I believed that this City of vipers must have been the most wicked in all the land. For behold, all the Gadiantons issue forth from this place to wreak havoc upon all the people in the Land Southward. And I could not believe that I would be allowed to open my mouth at all before them. 
61 But, for all that Kishkumen is the seat of all wickedness and the capital of the Gadiantons, the people do treat with each other with justice within their own city. Yea, there is not one person who does walk upon the streets of the city in hunger, or athirst. And, if one lacks clothing, it is freely given. And for money, none lack. Indeed, all give freely of their substance to the needy. And, if you believe it not, look upon this little house of mine and ask me how I did acquire it and furnish it. For, I came into the city without purse or script. 
62 And behold, it has been exceedingly difficult to testify against this city. For, by comparison, the people live here just as we do in Mentina, having all things is common. But, they do live by theft and by destruction and this is a great evil. Wherefore, I do not make my comparison very strongly. But behold, among their own, they live by charity and every person imparts to the needy from out of that substance they have stolen. Does this not seem strange to you? 
63 And Korim, the beggar, answered him, saying: 
64 It is not strange at all, Shimnet. For, this is the way that is forced upon all they who would live among the Nephites in comfort. For behold, the Nephites do set the standard for who is rich and who is poor by their pride. And the poor are often cast out among them, or cast aside in their hearts. This causes discontent in the hearts of many. For, though they wish not to be like unto the Nephites in their hearts, their very society causes to well within them the desire to get gain. And, if they cannot get gain by the sweat of their face because of the vanity and the jealousy of the rich among the Nephites, they turn to theft to gain thereby. 
65 And San spoke to them, saying: 
66 This must be our plan. We must go among the people of this city and testify against the Nephites and against their great pride and lust for gain. We must in all things testify against the Nephites so that the people of this city may be drawn in to listen to our voices and hearken unto our words. We shall not incite them to any kind of violence against the Nephites, but let us bring to their eyes the wickedness of this standard which has been set up by their brethren the Nephites. Then, when we have the ear of the people, let us teach them how upright their own standard is and how they ought to use it for good. Then we shall teach them of the right way to apply that which they already have as a custom among their own people. Do you not think this is a good plan? 
67 And Himneth spoke, saying: 
68 Nay, brother, I do not think it a good plan at all. For, though I see your intention, it is but a strategy and a deception. Do you not think that these people, who live by deception and artifice, when they see the deception, will not simply applaud the deception and go about their own business again? 
69 And behold, their business is evil. We know how they destroy all that they meet in the Land Northward. And they insinuate themselves into positions of authority in cities and in governments in order to do their evil. What does it matter that they come back here and treat each other amicably? We must never forget that they do all manner of wickedness in the world at large and they do bring down whole societies with their evil. 
70 We are no deceivers. Let us not teach the word of the Lord through any kind of deception. We ought not think that we may teach true principles by weaving them in with false. This is a thing our prophets have warned us will be the absolute destruction of the Nephites, and even the ruin in the latter days of they whom the Lord will use to spread His gospel among all nations. Let us not take up this device before this people. 
71 And Korim answered her before San, saying: 
72 Hearken unto your sister, San, for she speaks wisely. Do not believe that you can deceive these people with your words. For, you are not one who can mix anything. Your words are strong and true and they are filled with the Holy Ghost. Do not darken counsel nor play games with these people. For they will see through you and smile, and even appreciate your attempt to be like them. But do not believe that this will cause them to want to become like unto you in return. 
73 And San answered in his turn, saying: 
74 But, do you not think that the end justifies us in using this strategy? For, which of you can say that the Nephite custom is good? And I do agree with you, Korim, that it is the ways and customs of the Nephites in perverting the right way of the Lord, that has given rise to the Gadiantons. Wherefore, there is no real artifice in this plan. Let us undertake to cause the people of this city to see the rightness of their ways, with regard to themselves, and the very wrongness of their ways with regard to others. And, if it seem deception, then let the end, which is greatly to be desired, justify the means we use to achieve it. 
75 But Himneth answered him, saying: 
76 Is any good end worth achieving by bad means. Behold, the Spirit whispers to me that this will come to vanity. For behold, this people are expert and accomplished in just what you propose to do. Yea, they make their way in life entirely by such means. And those of the Gadiantons who have made themselves great in the eyes of the Nephites, and are made judges unto them, do so by first convincing their neighbors of the righteousness. Then, when they have acquired their desire, they turn the city to wickedness. We cannot use such a device, for, you must recall that the Lord sent us into this land to prepare the hearts of them that are willing to make a righteous sacrifice for their neighbors. 
77 Brother, I say unto you, This is not the way. For, no good end is justified by evil means. Behold, there will be many in this land at this time who will claim that the desired end does justify devious means, but it will never be so for all of their claiming. And there will come a day when even the elect of God will contrive devious means in order that they might bring cause into the hearts of the Saints that they might do the things that their rulers think is expedient for them. And this will seem good to all for a time, but it will bring about the break up of the church in the last days. 
78 This has been seen by our prophets, and behold, it is part of the vision and foresight of Hementim and Shi-Tugo, and the reason they set up Zion in our communities. And our father, Hagoth, and indeed all the fathers of our people, did agree to do this. Let us not dishonor them by breaking with those good things revealed unto our fathers for our good. Please, go now into a closet and pray mightily unto the Lord, that the Holy Ghost might direct us in our preaching unto this people. 
79 And San did as his sister instructed. He retired unto the place his brother, Shimnet, had set up for a place of prayer. And he did entreat the Lord as to the best method and plan to use in order that they might accomplish the Lord’s design in the City of Kishkumen. And behold, the Lord did visit him upon the Way. And these are the words of the Lord unto him: 
80 Behold, San my servant, I am pleased with thy zeal in wishing to put an end to the Gadiantons through the preaching of my word unto them. And, it is a good intention, for, who can deny that to end the Gadiantons in their own city would not be beneficial unto all the people, both of the Land Southward and of the Land Northward. In this desire of thy heart, I am well pleased. 
81 But behold, I say unto thee, I shall soon end My ministry unto Mine own people here in the land of thy origin and, when I have finished My work here, My own people will put Me to the death. But, be of good cheer. For, after that they have killed My body, for I shall give them leave to do even this, I shall rise again, according to that which was established from the beginning. And I shall come unto Mine own again and all who believe on Me shall I redeem. 
82 And behold, San my servant, in the moment of My death, and for as long as I lay in the tomb, there shall be a great destruction and tumult in this, the Land Southward. And even in the Land Northward there shall be tumult, but not so severe as that calamity which shall come upon this people. And all the truly wicked shall be destroyed from off the face of the Land Southward. 
83 Behold, I say unto thee, The day of which I speak cometh quickly. Wherefore, stand up among this people and preach to them and prophecy of the coming destruction only. They shall know of what sort they are and, in the day of destruction, they shall remember thy words unto them. 
84 But behold, unto all the cities whereunto I have sent thee and thine, I shall visit with a fire from heaven. For, the people of these cities wax gross in their iniquities and I will utterly destroy them, not by the natural calamity that will befall other cities in this land, but by an all consuming fire out of heaven. 
85 And this is my commandment unto thee: Thou shalt preach my pure word unto this people and think not to convert them in any thing. For they are most wicked and shall mock even Me to thy face. Wherefore, thou shalt send thy brethren and thy sister away, to begin their journey back into thine own land. And thou shalt continue the work that thy brother Shimnet has begun here in this city until the day that I shall send thee also back into the lands of the Nem, And then thou shalt go speedily out of this city, for the people will diligently seek to take away thy life. But, be not fearful. For, just as I have preserved thee in other places, I shall preserve thy life in this place also. 
86 And many other things did the Lord speak unto San that he would not share, for they are not to be spoken at this time. But, to his credit, after that the Holy Ghost had confirmed in him all that the Lord had commanded him, San did all the words of the Lord. 
87 And behold, he instructed his brethren and his sister to fly speedily out of the city, for the Lord had called him not to convert the people, but to testify unto them of their imminent destruction. And they did follow his counsel, and all of the seven companions went with them out of the city, except Korim. For, Korim had made a covenant to go with San into whatever the Lord did command him. 
88 And the prophets and their companions did escape from the vilest and most wicked nest of vipers in all the land as easily as they had entered it. For, no one molested them as they made their escape. 
89 But, San and Korim remained in the city and set themselves up together on a embankment before the street which ran through it to preach unto the people. And San did preach mightily unto the people. And these are the words he preached unto them: 
90 Behold, thus does the Lord God say unto this people: 
91 It would be good for all whoso liveth in the City of Kishkumen to look within themselves and examine their hearts. For who of you declareth before God that thy heart is pure and ready to meet Him? 
92 Behold, how canst thou say that thou doest good in the sight of the Lord, thou who doest robbery? And how canst thou declare that thou art worthy, thou who beatest a man for his coat and his goods? Whoso among you counteth himself righteous who stealeth his neighbor’s house. 
93 But this is not all, thou nest of vipers! Thus doth the Lord thy God say unto all this city: 
94 Repent speedily all you who live in this city! For an hour of tribulation cometh upon all who live in this land. Yea, unto some cities it is given that the earth riseth up and covereth them. And unto others it is given and decreed that, where they did inhabit a valley, a mountain riseth up in the stead thereof. And unto still others the sea riseth up by the decree of the great God and consumeth the inhabitants thereof, even every one. Yea, this is the decree that I have set in the heavens, and I excuse not Myself. 
95 But behold, against all ye citizens of Kishkumen, I have decreed a decree in My wrath concerning you that surpasseth all that shall come to pass unto the cities of the Land Southward. Yea, it shall be unto thee, Oh City of vipers, as it shall be even unto all the cities that casteth out My prophets and spitteth upon them, and smiteth them, yea, and doeth whatsoever they will with them. Yea, I declare unto thee, Kishkumen, it shall be unto thee as it shall be unto the Cities of Laman, Josh, and Gad. 
96 Thou shalt perish with fire, even all thy houses and thy towers. Thy streets and thy byways shall melt with heat, and thy fair gardens shall be a parchment. Thy fountains shall burst and become a choking vapor, and thy storehouses shall become a furnace. And all thy inhabitants shall run to and fro, but every one shall burn with fire and become a stubble. Yea, not one of thy people shall escape thy secret place, for a fire shall come down upon thee that none shall escape. Yea, all thy goods and substance shall become ash and thy wine a poisonous vapor. Thy courtyards and plazas, rich with fruit of every kind, shall blow away upon a scorching wind. Thy paths and pleasant walkways shall be molten. 
97 Can any escape My wrath? I say unto thee, Nay. For, should there be any without thee, having not yet entered into thy secret path which leadeth up unto thy open gates, they shall choke with the fumes that shall issue forth out of thee. Yea, thou shalt inhale the sweet air of the valley and exhale the noxious and poisonous fumes of the death. And behold, all who are caught by that breath, shall fall by the wayside and shrivel up. 
98 Behold, this is the decree which I have decreed in My wrath against thee, Kishkumen. Wherefore, it were good that all thy children should flee from thy bosom, oh mother of harlots! For, thou shalt no longer have whereby they might suck at thy breast, being withered and burned. And all thy teaching shall go down into the earth, molten. Yea, all thy iniquity shall fly up into the air as ash and be dispersed. 
99 Yea, and give ear all the ends of the earth and let this be as a sign unto you. For, if any city in this land doth ever again issue forth progeny born of filth and fornication, of lyings and cheatings, of murder and mayhem, it shall bring a similar ruin upon the land. Yea, and if any nation in this fair land shall labor to produce again a vomitous issue, such as thou, Kishkumen, thou ravenous beast, hast done unto this nation, behold, and the people do nothing to prevent it, there shall come upon that nation a like calamity. 
100 Behold, and it shall be as if a smoke and a fire of destruction cometh down upon them from heaven that none stayeth. For, show Me the hand that contesteth against the Lord and prevaileth. Yea, show Me the sword that contendeth against the Lord God! For My word is as a two edged sword that parteth the sinew and spilleth out all wickedness upon the ground. Think not to contend against the Lord thy God, but labor to appease My wrath before the day of its fullness. For behold, I am patient with longsuffering. But, when My wrath is kindled against the wicked, none can stay. Nay, though thou riseth up even unto Me in the end, oh man, with prayings and entreaty, when My wrath is full, My ears are shut. 
101 Wherefore, repent all ye who inhabit this evil place and flee even out of it while the day remaineth wherein you might make your flight. For behold, there be but a narrow way in which to escape and but a short time left to affect it. And, when the calamity is upon you, there remaineth no room for you to escape and you shall all die in your retreat. Yea, your bodies shall heap up upon your secret way and your hidden city shall no longer be a safety for you. Repent ye, and remove hastily from this place of horror. 
102 And after this manner did San preach the words of Christ’s warning unto the people of the City of Kishkumen. Yea, for three days did he repeat the words which the Lord had given him to speak and he moved not from upon the embankment in all that time, but continually preached the warning of the Lord unto the people. 
103 And behold, there were some who did heed the words of the prophet, but these were exceedingly few. But the rest of the inhabitants did pass by him winking and scorning his words. For, they believed him to be a madman, and they gave him no heed at all. 
104 Wherefore, at the end of three days, the Lord did command San to depart from the midst of the city and he did as the Lord commanded. And behold, Korim did go with him and support him in all that he did and said. 
105 And, when they had traveled two days out of the City of Kishkumen, they met again their companions who had camped along the way. And behold, a great multitude had gathered unto them from out of all the places whereunto they had gone to preach. And they were found teaching and instructing the people in all that they should do to please the Lord. 
106 And, when they were seen of them, even from within the camp, the brethren of San came out to greet them, and they fell upon them and kissed them. 
107 For, the Lord had also visited them and told them all that He desired them to declare unto the people of Kishkumen, and they feared for them. Nevertheless, the Lord had comforted them in their fear and they prayed all the day long that they would once again see the face of their brother. Wherefore, they did feel blessed and thankful upon seeing them from away off approaching the camp, and they did run out to meet San and Korim upon the road. 
108 And when they had recounted unto each other all that had transpired, they determined that the day of which the Lord had spoken must be near indeed. And, giving instruction unto all the people that they nurture and succor each other, they struck their camp and made ready to return even unto the Land Northward. 
109 But behold, many of the multitude did also desire that which the seven companions of San had desired of them. Yea, they desired to repent and purify themselves before God and make a strait way before the Lord. Wherefore, the brethren of Oug bid all that would follow them out of the land to follow them, that they might come into the Land Northward and become Nem. And the people rejoiced and declared that this was the desire of their hearts. And the number of them were fifty and two men and seventeen women and twelve little children. 
110 And behold, the brethren of Oug and Himneth did baptize them in water and gave them the gift of the Holy Ghost to guide them. And they instructed them in all the ways of the Nem and exhorted them to lift each other up and support each other and not murmur against each other when the way became hard before them. 
111 For behold, they knew that they could not get home following the way they had come, for they were become a large party and there would be no boats to take them back the way they had come. And they knew also that they might be forced to traverse the Land of Desolation even on foot in order to reach the borders of the Land Northward. Wherefore, they instructed all the people to have patience and charity one for another, for they knew the way would be hard. 


CHAPTER 8 
1 And the band traveled far and they did work to get their provender in every city they met upon the way. And they did preach the Gospel of Jesus unto all the people. And behold, they never again found people so hardened as they had theretofore, and the Lord blessed them in their journey. 
2 But behold, ere they had traveled the half of the Land Southward in their progress toward their own country, and they were on the road between the City of Moroni and the City of Moronihah, a great tumult shook the land, insomuch that none could hold their footing. And behold, they did all fall to the ground. Yea, they did embrace the ground and lift up their prayers for their salvation unto the Lord. 
3 And they could see afar off that the great City of Moroni was swallowed by the sea, and the sea rose up in many places and cut off the way before them. Yea, and in the stead of land before them, there formed many seas, both great and small, and many lakes, and the place where they had fallen down upon the ground became an island of the sea. 
4 And behold, ere they could begin again their journey, the sky blackened and the air thickened, and they heard as the sound of continuous thunderings from the West. Yea, before the first day of the calamity had ended, none could see even the hand held up in front of their eyes and the air was thick with vapor. And they all feared for their lives, but, the children of Sanempet led them in mighty prayer and the Lord preserved them. And thus they stood still for the space of three days. 
5 And, when the three days were come to an end, they did break the last of their bread together and blessed it unto the Lord. And they did pour out the last of their wine together and blessed it unto the Lord, for, thus did the Spirit whisper to them that they ought to do. And behold, they did share this last meal one with another, believing that, perhaps, they would perish upon this tiny island. 
6 But, they did hear the voice of the Lord descending out of heaven, and even they did see Him afar off, and they were comforted and continued in prayer and supplication before the Lord. And behold, after they had passed one day in prayer and supplication, a small body of men hailed them from the shore afar off to the west. And they beheld that the waters had receded somewhat, insofar that they were all able to walk to the other shore. 
7 And the men that greeted them told them that the Lord commanded that all should hastily be gathered in unto the temple in the Land Bountiful, which lay to the west of where they stood, and that they should hasten even there to meet the Lord and His servants. 
8 But behold, the children knew that the distance was far, even many days or even weeks through the wilderness and they could not reach the place on foot. Wherefore, they sought the guidance of the Spirit in the thing. 
9 Wherefore behold, a strange and a mighty miracle took place unto the children of Sanempet and unto all them that did follow them. Behold, the Spirit came upon them mightily as they prayed, and they were surrounded about by angels. And behold, they were carried as if upon the wind even unto a place that was near unto the City of Bountiful. 
10 And they did walk into the city to the place round about the temple, and behold, there was a great multitude gathered there all about the temple. And, as they approached, behold, they saw the Lord descending upon the steps of the temple. And they cast themselves upon the ground as did all the people and rejoiced before their God. 
11 Now therefore, we do see that the children of Sanempet and their companions were with the Lord when He did make His visitation to the people who had survived the great calamities that had befallen the Land Southward. And behold, they were the only people of all the people who inhabited the more easterly regions of the Land Southward who survived the great destruction. And they were ministered unto by the Lord and by angels, and also by the Twelve whom the Lord had called. 
12 Now, the account of His visit to the Land Southward is written in another place, but we do know of it of a surety because of the testimony of the children of Sanempet and of all that followed them back into the Land Northward. But behold, we do also know of it because of the little book that was carried back even unto Oug with the party. For, Timothy, one of the Twelve whom Jesus chose, did also travel with them. And this is all recorded in another place. 
13 And it was as Jesus said unto Oug, that his brethren were safe and that they were upon the road traveling unto their home, even at the moment that Jesus did make His visitation unto the Nem of Mentina. And all this is also recorded in another place. 
14 Sufficeth to say that the children of Sanempet did fulfill the mission upon which the Lord had sent them. Yea, they did go even unto the most wicked of the cities of the Land Southward and they did testify against them. And all that they did testify would befall those wicked cities did verily come to pass. Of all this we have ample proof and witness in the writings of our people. Wherefore, I, Pa Nat, do make an end of my abridgement of the missions of the children of Sanempet.
________________




THE FIRST BOOK OF MORONI 
THE SON OF MORMON, 
WHO ABRIDGED THE NEPHITE RECORD 


The revelations and words of the Prophet Moroni, the son of Mormon, as found in the Nephite Record known as the Book of Mormon, while traveling through the Land Southward and the Land Northward during the Great War between the Lamanites and the Nephites. 
CHAPTER 1 
The words of Moroni, as recorded in Chapter 8 of his father’s record, the Book of Mormon, which is found in the record of the Nephites. 
1 Behold I, Moroni, do finish the record of my father, Mormon. Behold, I have but few things to write, which things I have been commanded by my father. 
2 And now it came to pass that after the great and tremendous battle at Cumorah, behold, the Nephites who had escaped into the country southward were hunted by the Lamanites, until they were all destroyed. 
3 And my father also was killed by them, and I even remain alone to write the sad tale of the destruction of my people. But behold, they are gone, and I fulfil the commandment of my father. And whether they will slay me, I know not. 
4 Therefore I will write and hide up the records in the earth; and whither I go it mattereth not. 
5 Behold, my father hath made this record, and he hath written the intent thereof. And behold, I would write it also if I had room upon the plates, but I have not; and ore I have none, for I am alone. My father hath been slain in battle, and all my kinsfolk, and I have not friends nor whither to go; and how long the Lord will suffer that I may live I know not. 
6 Behold, four hundred years have passed away since the coming of our Lord and Savior. 
7 And behold, the Lamanites have hunted my people, the Nephites, down from city to city and from place to place, even until they are no more; and great has been their fall; yea, great and marvelous is the destruction of my people, the Nephites. 
8 And behold, it is the hand of the Lord which hath done it. And behold also, the Lamanites are at war one with another; and the whole face of this land is one continual round of murder and bloodshed; and no one knoweth the end of the war. 
9 And now, behold, I say no more concerning them, for there are none save it be the Lamanites and robbers that do exist upon the face of the land. 
10 And there are none that do know the true God save it be the disciples of Jesus, who did tarry in the land until the wickedness of the people was so great that the Lord would not suffer them to remain with the people; and whether they be upon the face of the land no man knoweth. 
11 But behold, my father and I have seen them, and they have ministered unto us. 
12 And whoso receiveth this record, and shall not condemn it because of the imperfections which are in it, the same shall know of greater things than these. Behold, I am Moroni; and were it possible, I would make all things known unto you. 
13 Behold, I make an end of speaking concerning this people. I am the son of Mormon, and my father was a descendant of Nephi. 
14 And I am the same who hideth up this record unto the Lord; the plates thereof are of no worth, because of the commandment of the Lord. For he truly saith that no one shall have them to get gain; but the record thereof is of great worth; and whoso shall bring it to light, him will the Lord bless. 
15 For none can have power to bring it to light save it be given him of God; for God wills that it shall be done with an eye single to his glory, or the welfare of the ancient and long dispersed covenant people of the Lord. 
16 And blessed be he that shall bring this thing to light; for it shall be brought out of darkness unto light, according to the word of God; yea, it shall be brought out of the earth, and it shall shine forth out of darkness, and come unto the knowledge of the people; and it shall be done by the power of God. 
17 And if there be faults they be the faults of a man. But behold, we know no fault; nevertheless God knoweth all things; therefore, he that condemneth, let him be aware lest he shall be in danger of hell fire. 
18 And he that saith: Show unto me, or ye shall be smitten—let him beware lest he commandeth that which is forbidden of the Lord. 
19 For behold, the same that judgeth rashly shall be judged rashly again; for according to his works shall his wages be; therefore, he that smiteth shall be smitten again, of the Lord. 
20 Behold what the scripture says—man shall not smite, neither shall he judge; for judgment is mine, saith the Lord, and vengeance is mine also, and I will repay. 
21 And he that shall breathe out wrath and strifes against the work of the Lord, and against the covenant people of the Lord who are the house of Israel, and shall say: We will destroy the work of the Lord, and the Lord will not remember his covenant which he hath made unto the house of Israel—the same is in danger to be hewn down and cast into the fire; 
22 For the eternal purposes of the Lord shall roll on, until all his promises shall be fulfilled. 
23 Search the prophecies of Isaiah. Behold, I cannot write them. Yea, behold I say unto you, that those saints who have gone before me, who have possessed this land, shall cry, yea, even from the dust will they cry unto the Lord; and as the Lord liveth he will remember the covenant which he hath made with them. 
24 And he knoweth their prayers, that they were in behalf of their brethren. And he knoweth their faith, for in his name could they remove mountains; and in his name could they cause the earth to shake; and by the power of his word did they cause prisons to tumble to the earth; yea, even the fiery furnace could not harm them, neither wild beasts nor poisonous serpents, because of the power of his word. 
25 And behold, their prayers were also in behalf of him that the Lord should suffer to bring these things forth. 
26 And no one need say they shall not come, for they surely shall, for the Lord hath spoken it; for out of the earth shall they come, by the hand of the Lord, and none can stay it; and it shall come in a day when it shall be said that miracles are done away; and it shall come even as if one should speak from the dead. 
27 And it shall come in a day when the blood of saints shall cry unto the Lord, because of secret combinations and the works of darkness. 
28 Yea, it shall come in a day when the power of God shall be denied, and churches become defiled and be lifted up in the pride of their hearts; yea, even in a day when leaders of churches and teachers shall rise in the pride of their hearts, even to the envying of them who belong to their churches. 
29 Yea, it shall come in a day when there shall be heard of fires, and tempests, and vapors of smoke in foreign lands; 
30 And there shall also be heard of wars, rumors of wars, and earthquakes in divers places. 
31 Yea, it shall come in a day when there shall be great pollutions upon the face of the earth; there shall be murders, and robbing, and lying, and deceivings, and whoredoms, and all manner of abominations; when there shall be many who will say, Do this, or do that, and it mattereth not, for the Lord will uphold such at the last day. But wo unto such, for they are in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity. 
32 Yea, it shall come in a day when there shall be churches built up that shall say: Come unto me, and for your money you shall be forgiven of your sins. 
33 O ye wicked and perverse and stiffnecked people, why have ye built up churches unto yourselves to get gain? Why have ye transfigured the holy word of God, that ye might bring damnation upon your souls? Behold, look ye unto the revelations of God; for behold, the time cometh at that day when all these things must be fulfilled. 
34 Behold, the Lord hath shown unto me great and marvelous things concerning that which must shortly come, at that day when these things shall come forth among you. 
35 Behold, I speak unto you as if ye were present, and yet ye are not. But behold, Jesus Christ hath shown you unto me, and I know your doing. 
36 And I know that ye do walk in the pride of your hearts; and there are none save a few only who do not lift themselves up in the pride of their hearts, unto the wearing of very fine apparel, unto envying, and strifes, and malice, and persecutions, and all manner of iniquities; and your churches, yea, even every one, have become polluted because of the pride of your hearts. 
37 For behold, ye do love money, and your substance, and your fine apparel, and the adorning of your churches, more than ye love the poor and the needy, the sick and the afflicted. 
38 O ye pollutions, ye hypocrites, ye teachers, who sell yourselves for that which will canker, why have ye polluted the holy church of God? Why are ye ashamed to take upon you the name of Christ? Why do ye not think that greater is the value of an endless happiness than that misery which never dies—because of the praise of the world? 
39 Why do ye adorn yourselves with that which hath no life, and yet suffer the hungry, and the needy, and the naked, and the sick and the afflicted to pass by you, and notice them not? 
40 Yea, why do ye build up your secret abominations to get gain, and cause that widows should mourn before the Lord, and also orphans to mourn before the Lord, and also the blood of their fathers and their husbands to cry unto the Lord from the ground, for vengeance upon your heads? 
41 Behold, the sword of vengeance hangeth over you; and the time soon cometh that he avengeth the blood of the saints upon you, for he will not suffer their cries any longer. 


CHAPTER 2 
The words of Moroni, as recorded in Chapter 9 of his father’s record, the Book of Mormon, which is found in the record of the Nephites. 
1 And now, I speak also concerning those who do not believe in Christ. 
2 Behold, will ye believe in the day of your visitation—behold, when the Lord shall come, yea, even that great day when the earth shall be rolled together as a scroll, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, yea, in that great day when ye shall be brought to stand before the Lamb of God—then will ye say that there is no God? 
3 Then will ye longer deny the Christ, or can ye behold the Lamb of God? Do ye suppose that ye shall dwell with him under a consciousness of your guilt? Do ye suppose that ye could be happy to dwell with that holy Being, when your souls are racked with a consciousness of guilt that ye have ever abused his laws? 
4 Behold, I say unto you that ye would be more miserable to dwell with a holy and just God, under a consciousness of your filthiness before him, than ye would to dwell with the damned souls in hell. 
5 For behold, when ye shall be brought to see your nakedness before God, and also the glory of God, and the holiness of Jesus Christ, it will kindle a flame of unquenchable fire upon you. 
6 O then ye unbelieving, turn ye unto the Lord; cry mightily unto the Father in the name of Jesus, that perhaps ye may be found spotless, pure, fair, and white, having been cleansed by the blood of the Lamb, at that great and last day. 
7 And again I speak unto you who deny the revelations of God, and say that they are done away, that there are no revelations, nor prophecies, nor gifts, nor healing, nor speaking with tongues, and the interpretation of tongues; 
8 Behold I say unto you, he that denieth these things knoweth not the gospel of Christ; yea, he has not read the scriptures; if so, he does not understand them. 
9 For do we not read that God is the same yesterday, today, and forever, and in him there is no variableness neither shadow of changing? 
10 And now, if ye have imagined up unto yourselves a god who doth vary, and in whom there is shadow of changing, then have ye imagined up unto yourselves a god who is not a God of miracles. 
11 But behold, I will show unto you a God of miracles, even the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; and it is that same God who created the heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are. 
12 Behold, he created Adam, and by Adam came the fall of man. And because of the fall of man came Jesus Christ, even the Father and the Son; and because of Jesus Christ came the redemption of man. 
13 And because of the redemption of man, which came by Jesus Christ, they are brought back into the presence of the Lord; yea, this is wherein all men are redeemed, because the death of Christ bringeth to pass the resurrection, which bringeth to pass a redemption from an endless sleep, from which sleep all men shall be awakened by the power of God when the trump shall sound; and they shall come forth, both small and great, and all shall stand before his bar, being redeemed and loosed from this eternal band of death, which death is a temporal death. 
14 And then cometh the judgment of the Holy One upon them; and then cometh the time that he that is filthy shall be filthy still; and he that is righteous shall be righteous still; he that is happy shall be happy still; and he that is unhappy shall be unhappy still. 
15 And now, O all ye that have imagined up unto yourselves a god who can do no miracles, I would ask of you, have all these things passed, of which I have spoken? Has the end come yet? Behold I say unto you, Nay; and God has not ceased to be a God of miracles. 
16 Behold, are not the things that God hath wrought marvelous in our eyes? Yea, and who can comprehend the marvelous works of God? 
17 Who shall say that it was not a miracle that by his word the heaven and the earth should be; and by the power of his word man was created of the dust of the earth; and by the power of his word have miracles been wrought? 
18 And who shall say that Jesus Christ did not do many mighty miracles? And there were many mighty miracles wrought by the hands of the apostles. 
19 And if there were miracles wrought then, why has God ceased to be a God of miracles and yet be an unchangeable Being? And behold, I say unto you he changeth not; if so he would cease to be God; and he ceaseth not to be God, and is a God of miracles. 
20 And the reason why he ceaseth to do miracles among the children of men is because that they dwindle in unbelief, and depart from the right way, and know not the God in whom they should trust. 
21 Behold, I say unto you that whoso believeth in Christ, doubting nothing, whatsoever he shall ask the Father in the name of Christ it shall be granted him; and this promise is unto all, even unto the ends of the earth. 
22 For behold, thus said Jesus Christ, the Son of God, unto his disciples who should tarry, yea, and also to all his disciples, in the hearing of the multitude: Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature; 
23 And he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved, but he that believeth not shall be damned; 
24 And these signs shall follow them that believe—in my name shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick and they shall recover; 
25 And whosoever shall believe in my name, doubting nothing, unto him will I confirm all my words, even unto the ends of the earth. 
26 And now, behold, who can stand against the works of the Lord? Who can deny his sayings? Who will rise up against the almighty power of the Lord? Who will despise the works of the Lord? Who will despise the children of Christ? Behold, all ye who are despisers of the works of the Lord, for ye shall wonder and perish. 
27 O then despise not, and wonder not, but hearken unto the words of the Lord, and ask the Father in the name of Jesus for what things soever ye shall stand in need. Doubt not, but be believing, and begin as in times of old, and come unto the Lord with all your heart, and work out your own salvation with fear and trembling before him. 
28 Be wise in the days of your probation; strip yourselves of all uncleanness; ask not, that ye may consume it on your lusts, but ask with a firmness unshaken, that ye will yield to no temptation, but that ye will serve the true and living God. 
29 See that ye are not baptized unworthily; see that ye partake not of the sacrament of Christ unworthily; but see that ye do all things in worthiness, and do it in the name of Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God; and if ye do this, and endure to the end, ye will in nowise be cast out. 
30 Behold, I speak unto you as though I spake from the dead; for I know that ye shall have my words. 
31 Condemn me not because of mine imperfection, neither my father, because of his imperfection, neither them who have written before him; but rather give thanks unto God that he hath made manifest unto you our imperfections, that ye may learn to be more wise than we have been. 
32 And now, behold, we have written this record according to our knowledge, in the characters which are called among us the reformed Egyptian, being handed down and altered by us, according to our manner of speech. 
33 And if our plates had been sufficiently large we should have written in Hebrew; but the Hebrew hath been altered by us also; and if we could have written in Hebrew, behold, ye would have had no imperfection in our record. 
34 But the Lord knoweth the things which we have written, and also that none other people knoweth our language; and because that none other people knoweth our language, therefore he hath prepared means for the interpretation thereof. 
35 And these things are written that we may rid our garments of the blood of our brethren, who have dwindled in unbelief. 
36 And behold, these things which we have desired concerning our brethren, yea, even their restoration to the knowledge of Christ, are according to the prayers of all the saints who have dwelt in the land. 
37 And may the Lord Jesus Christ grant that their prayers may be answered according to their faith; and may God the Father remember the covenant which he hath made with the house of Israel; and may he bless them forever, through faith on the name of Jesus Christ. Amen. 


CHAPTER 3 
The words of Moroni, as recorded in the beginning of Chapter 1 of the Book of Ether, which is found in the record of the Nephites. 
1 And now I, Moroni, proceed to give an account of those ancient inhabitants who were destroyed by the hand of the Lord upon the face of this north country. 
2 And I take mine account from the twenty and four plates which were found by the people of Limhi, which is called the Book of Ether. 
3 And as I suppose that the first part of this record, which speaks concerning the creation of the world, and also of Adam, and an account from that time even to the great tower, and whatsoever things transpired among the children of men until that time, is had among the Jews— 
4 Therefore I do not write those things which transpired from the days of Adam until that time; but they are had upon the plates; and whoso findeth them, the same will have power that he may get the full account. 
5 But behold, I give not the full account, but a part of the account I give, from the tower down until they were destroyed. 
6 And on this wise do I give the account. 
This account can be found in the Book of Ether in The Book or Mormon. 


CHAPTER 4 
The words of Moroni, as recorded in Chapter 4 of the Book of Ether, which is found in the record of the Nephites. 
1 And the Lord commanded the Brother of Jared to go down out of the mount from the presence of the Lord, and write the things which he had seen; and they were forbidden to come unto the children of men until after that he should be lifted up upon the cross; and for this cause did king Mosiah keep them, that they should not come unto the world until after Christ should show himself unto his people. 
2 And after Christ truly had showed himself unto his people he commanded that they should be made manifest. 
3 And now, after that, they have all dwindled in unbelief; and there is none save it be the Lamanites, and they have rejected the gospel of Christ; therefore I am commanded that I should hide them up again in the earth. 
4 Behold, I have written upon these plates the very things which the Brother of Jared saw; and there never were greater things made manifest than those which were made manifest unto the Brother of Jared. 
5 Wherefore the Lord hath commanded me to write them; and I have written them. And he commanded me that I should seal them up; and he also hath commanded that I should seal up the interpretation thereof; wherefore I have sealed up the interpreters, according to the commandment of the Lord. 
6 For the Lord said unto me: They shall not go forth unto the Gentiles until the day that they shall repent of their iniquity, and become clean before the Lord. 
7 And in that day that they shall exercise faith in me, saith the Lord, even as the Brother of Jared did, that they may become sanctified in me, then will I manifest unto them the things which the Brother of Jared saw, even to the unfolding unto them all my revelations, saith Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of the heavens and of the earth, and all things that in them are. 
8 And he that will contend against the word of the Lord, let him be accursed; and he that shall deny these things, let him be accursed; for unto them will I show no greater things, saith Jesus Christ; for I am he who speaketh. 
9 And at my command the heavens are opened and are shut; and at my word the earth shall shake; and at my command the inhabitants thereof shall pass away, even so as by fire. 
10 And he that believeth not my words believeth not my disciples; and if it so be that I do not speak, judge ye; for ye shall know that it is I that speaketh, at the last day. 
11 But he that believeth these things which I have spoken, him will I visit with the manifestations of my Spirit, and he shall know and bear record. For because of my Spirit he shall know that these things are true; for it persuadeth men to do good. 
12 And whatsoever thing persuadeth men to do good is of me; for good cometh of none save it be of me. I am the same that leadeth men to all good; he that will not believe my words will not believe me—that I am; and he that will not believe me will not believe the Father who sent me. For behold, I am the Father, I am the light, and the life, and the truth of the world. 
13 Come unto me, O ye Gentiles, and I will show unto you the greater things, the knowledge which is hid up because of unbelief. 
14 Come unto me, O ye house of Israel, and it shall be made manifest unto you how great things the Father hath laid up for you, from the foundation of the world; and it hath not come unto you, because of unbelief. 
15 Behold, when ye shall rend that veil of unbelief which doth cause you to remain in your awful state of wickedness, and hardness of heart, and blindness of mind, then shall the great and marvelous things which have been hid up from the foundation of the world from you—yea, when ye shall call upon the Father in my name, with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, then shall ye know that the Father hath remembered the covenant which he made unto your fathers, O house of Israel. 
16 And then shall my revelations which I have caused to be written by my servant John be unfolded in the eyes of all the people. Remember, when ye see these things, ye shall know that the time is at hand that they shall be made manifest in very deed. 
17 Therefore, when ye shall receive this record ye may know that the work of the Father has commenced upon all the face of the land. 
18 Therefore, repent all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me, and believe in my gospel, and be baptized in my name; for he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned; and signs shall follow them that believe in my name. 
19 And blessed is he that is found faithful unto my name at the last day, for he shall be lifted up to dwell in the kingdom prepared for him from the foundation of the world. And behold it is I that hath spoken it. Amen. 


CHAPTER 5 
The words of Moroni, as recorded in Chapter 5 of the Book of Ether, which is found in the record of the Nephites. 
1 And now I, Moroni, have written the words which were commanded me, according to my memory; and I have told you the things which I have sealed up; therefore touch them not in order that ye may translate; for that thing is forbidden you, except by and by it shall be wisdom in God. 
2 And behold, ye may be privileged that ye may show the plates unto those who shall assist to bring forth this work; 
3 And unto three shall they be shown by the power of God; wherefore they shall know of a surety that these things are true. 
4 And in the mouth of three witnesses shall these things be established; and the testimony of three, and this work, in the which shall be shown forth the power of God and also his word, of which the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost bear record—and all this shall stand as a testimony against the world at the last day. 
5 And if it so be that they repent and come unto the Father in the name of Jesus, they shall be received into the kingdom of God. 
6 And now, if I have no authority for these things, judge ye; for ye shall know that I have authority when ye shall see me, and we shall stand before God at the last day. Amen. 


CHAPTER 6 
The words of Moroni, as recorded in Chapter 12 of the Book of Ether, which is found in the record of the Nephites. 
1 And it came to pass that the days of Ether were in the days of Coriantumr; and Coriantumr was king over all the land. 
2 And Ether was a prophet of the Lord; wherefore Ether came forth in the days of Coriantumr, and began to prophesy unto the people, for he could not be restrained because of the Spirit of the Lord which was in him. 
3 For he did cry from the morning, even until the going down of the sun, exhorting the people to believe in God unto repentance lest they should be destroyed, saying unto them that by faith all things are fulfilled— 
4 Wherefore, whoso believeth in God might with surety hope for a better world, yea, even a place at the right hand of God, which hope cometh of faith, maketh an anchor to the souls of men, which would make them sure and steadfast, always abounding in good works, being led to glorify God. 
5 And it came to pass that Ether did prophesy great and marvelous things unto the people, which they did not believe, because they saw them not. 
6 And now, I, Moroni, would speak somewhat concerning these things; I would show unto the world that faith is things which are hoped for and not seen; wherefore, dispute not because ye see not, for ye receive no witness until after the trial of your faith. 
7 For it was by faith that Christ showed himself unto our fathers, after he had risen from the dead; and he showed not himself unto them until after they had faith in him; wherefore, it must needs be that some had faith in him, for he showed himself not unto the world. 
8 But because of the faith of men he has shown himself unto the world, and glorified the name of the Father, and prepared a way that thereby others might be partakers of the heavenly gift, that they might hope for those things which they have not seen. 
9 Wherefore, ye may also have hope, and be partakers of the gift, if ye will but have faith. 
10 Behold it was by faith that they of old were called after the holy order of God. 
11 Wherefore, by faith was the law of Moses given. But in the gift of his Son hath God prepared a more excellent way; and it is by faith that it hath been fulfilled. 
12 For if there be no faith among the children of men God can do no miracle among them; wherefore, he showed not himself until after their faith. 
13 Behold, it was the faith of Alma and Amulek that caused the prison to tumble to the earth. 
14 Behold, it was the faith of Nephi and Lehi that wrought the change upon the Lamanites, that they were baptized with fire and with the Holy Ghost. 
15 Behold, it was the faith of Ammon and his brethren which wrought so great a miracle among the Lamanites. 
16 Yea, and even all they who wrought miracles wrought them by faith, even those who were before Christ and also those who were after. 
17 And it was by faith that the three disciples obtained a promise that they should not taste of death; and they obtained not the promise until after their faith. 
18 And neither at any time hath any wrought miracles until after their faith; wherefore they first believed in the Son of God. 
19 And there were many whose faith was so exceedingly strong, even before Christ came, who could not be kept from within the veil, but truly saw with their eyes the things which they had beheld with an eye of faith, and they were glad. 
20 And behold, we have seen in this record that one of these was the Brother of Jared; for so great was his faith in God, that when God put forth his finger he could not hide it from the sight of the Brother of Jared, because of his word which he had spoken unto him, which word he had obtained by faith. 
21 And after the Brother of Jared had beheld the finger of the Lord, because of the promise which the Brother of Jared had obtained by faith, the Lord could not withhold anything from his sight; wherefore he showed him all things, for he could no longer be kept without the veil. 
22 And it is by faith that my fathers have obtained the promise that these things should come unto their brethren through the Gentiles; therefore the Lord hath commanded me, yea, even Jesus Christ. 
23 And I said unto him: Lord, the Gentiles will mock at these things, because of our weakness in writing; for Lord thou hast made us mighty in word by faith, but thou hast not made us mighty in writing; for thou hast made all this people that they could speak much, because of the Holy Ghost which thou hast given them; 
24 And thou hast made us that we could write but little, because of the awkwardness of our hands. Behold, thou hast not made us mighty in writing like unto the Brother of Jared, for thou madest him that the things which he wrote were mighty even as thou art, unto the overpowering of man to read them. 
25 Thou hast also made our words powerful and great, even that we cannot write them; wherefore, when we write we behold our weakness, and stumble because of the placing of our words; and I fear lest the Gentiles shall mock at our words. 
26 And when I had said this, the Lord spake unto me, saying: Fools mock, but they shall mourn; and my grace is sufficient for the meek, that they shall take no advantage of your weakness; 
27 And if men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them. 
28 Behold, I will show unto the Gentiles their weakness, and I will show unto them that faith, hope and charity bringeth unto me—the fountain of all righteousness. 
29 And I, Moroni, having heard these words, was comforted, and said: O Lord, thy righteous will be done, for I know that thou workest unto the children of men according to their faith; 
30 For the Brother of Jared said unto the mountain Zerin, Remove—and it was removed. And if he had not had faith it would not have moved; wherefore thou workest after men have faith. 
31 For thus didst thou manifest thyself unto thy disciples; for after they had faith, and did speak in thy name, thou didst show thyself unto them in great power. 
32 And I also remember that thou hast said that thou hast prepared a house for man, yea, even among the mansions of thy Father, in which man might have a more excellent hope; wherefore man must hop, or he cannot receive an inheritance in the place which thou hast prepared. 
33 And again, I remember that thou hast said that thou hast loved the world, even unto the laying down of thy life for the world, that thou mightest take it again to prepare a place for the children of men. 
34 And now I know that this love which thou hast had for the children of men is charity; wherefore, except men shall have charity they cannot inherit that place which thou hast prepared in the mansions of thy Father. 
35 Wherefore, I know by this thing which thou hast said, that if the Gentiles have not charity, because of our weakness, that thou wilt prove them, and take away their talent, yea, even that which they have received, and give unto them who shall have more abundantly. 
36 And it came to pass that I prayed unto the Lord that he would give unto the Gentiles grace, that they might have charity. 
37 And it came to pass that the Lord said unto me: If they have not charity it mattereth not unto thee, thou hast been faithful; wherefore, thy garments shall be made clean. And because thou hast seen thy weakness thou shalt be made strong, even unto the sitting down in the place which I have prepared in the mansions of my Father. 
38 And now I, Moroni, bid farewell unto the Gentiles, yea, and also unto my brethren whom I love, until we shall meet before the judgment-seat of Christ, where all men shall know that my garments are not spotted with your blood. 
39 And then shall ye know that I have seen Jesus, and that he hath talked with me face to face, and that he told me in plain humility, even as a man telleth another in mine own language, concerning these things; 
40 And only a few have I written, because of my weakness in writing. 
41 And now, I would commend you to seek this Jesus of whom the prophets and apostles have written, that the grace of God the Father, and also the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost, which beareth record of them, may be and abide in you forever. Amen.
________________




THE SECOND BOOK OF MORONI 
THE SON OF MORMON, 
WHO ABRIDGED THE NEPHITE RECORD 
The words of Moroni, as recorded in Chapters 1-10 of the Book of Moroni, which is found in the record of the Nephites. 
CHAPTER 1 
Moroni writes for the benefit of the Lamanites—The Nephites who will not deny Christ are put to death. 
1 Now I, Moroni, after having made an end of abridging the account of the people of Jared, I had supposed not to have written more, but I have not as yet perished; and I make not myself known to the Lamanites, lest they should destroy me. 
2 For behold, their wars are exceedingly fierce among themselves; and because of their hatred they put to death every Nephite that will not deny the Christ. 
3 And I, Moroni, will not deny the Christ; wherefore, I wander whithersoever I can for the safety of mine own life. 
4 Wherefore, I write a few more things, contrary to that which I had supposed; for I had supposed not to have written any more; but I write a few more things, that perhaps they may be of worth unto my brethren, the Lamanites, in some future day, according to the will of the Lord. 


CHAPTER 2 
Jesus gave the twelve Nephite disciples power to confer the gift of the Holy Ghost. 
1 The words of Christ, which he spake unto his disciples, the twelve whom he had chosen, as he laid his hands upon them— 
2 And he called them by name, saying: Ye shall call on the Father in my name, in mighty prayer; and after ye have done this ye shall have power that to him upon whom ye shall lay your hands, ye shall give the Holy Ghost; and in my name shall ye give it, for thus do mine apostles. 
3 Now Christ spake these words unto them at the time of his first appearing; and the multitude heard it not, but the disciples heard it; and on as many as they laid their hands, fell the Holy Ghost. 


CHAPTER 3 
Elders ordain priests and teachers by the laying on of hands.. 
1 The manner which the disciples, who were called the elders of the church, ordained priests and teachers— 
2 After they had prayed unto the Father in the name of Christ, they laid their hands upon them, and said: 
3 In the name of Jesus Christ I ordain you to be a priest (or if he be a teacher, I ordain you to be a teacher) to preach repentance and remission of sins through Jesus Christ, by the endurance of faith on his name to the end. Amen. 
4 And after this manner did they ordain priests and teachers, according to the gifts and callings of God unto men; and they ordained them by the power of the Holy Ghost, which was in them. 


CHAPTER 4 
How Elders and Priests administer the sacramental bread is explained. 
1 The manner of their elders and priests administering the flesh and blood of Christ unto the church; and they administered it according to the commandments of Christ; wherefore we know the manner to be true; and the elder or priest did minister it— 
2 And they did kneel down with the church, and pray to the Father in the name of Christ, saying: 
3 O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ, to bless and sanctify this bread to the souls of all those who partake of it; that they may eat in remembrance of the body of thy Son, and witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father, that they are willing to take upon them the name of thy Son, and always remember him, and keep his commandments which he hath given them, that they may always have his Spirit to be with them. Amen. 


CHAPTER 5 
The mode of administering the sacramental wine is set forth.. 
1 The manner of administering the wine—Behold, they took the cup, and said: 
2 O God, the Eternal Father, we ask thee, in the name of thy Son, Jesus Christ, to bless and sanctify this wine to the souls of all those who drink of it, that they may do it in remembrance of the blood of thy Son, which was shed for them; that they may witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father, that they do always remember him, that they may have his Spirit to be with them. Amen. 


CHAPTER 6 
Repentant persons are baptized and fellowshipped—Church members who repent are forgiven—Meetings are conducted by the power of the Holy Ghost. 
1 And now I speak concerning baptism. Behold, elders, priests, and teachers were baptized; and they were not baptized save they brought forth fruit meet that they were worthy of it. 
2 Neither did they receive any unto baptism save they came forth with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, and witnessed unto the church that they truly repented of all their sins. 
3 And none were received unto baptism save they took upon them the name of Christ, having a determination to serve him to the end. 
4 And after they had been received unto baptism, and were wrought upon and cleansed by the power of the Holy Ghost, they were numbered among the people of the church of Christ; and their names were taken, that they might be remembered and nourished by the good word of God, to keep them in the right way, to keep them continually watchful unto prayer, relying alone upon the merits of Christ, who was the author and the finisher of their faith. 
5 And the church did meet together oft, to fast and to pray, and to speak one with another concerning the welfare of their souls. 
6 And they did meet together oft to partake of bread and wine, in remembrance of the Lord Jesus. 
7 And they were strict to observe that there should be no iniquity among them; and whoso was found to commit iniquity, and three witnesses of the church did condemn them before the elders, and if they repented not, and confessed not, their names were blotted out, and they were not numbered among the people of Christ. 
8 But as oft as they repented and sought forgiveness, with real intent, they were forgiven. 
9 And their meetings were conducted by the church after the manner of the workings of the Spirit, and by the power of the Holy Ghost; for as the power of the Holy Ghost led them whether to preach, or to exhort, or to pray, or to supplicate, or to sing, even so it was done. 


CHAPTER 7 
An invitation is given to enter into the rest of the Lord—Pray with real intent—The Spirit of Christ enables men to know good from evil—Satan persuades men to deny Christ and do evil—The prophets manifest the coming of Christ—By faith, miracles are wrought and angels minister—Men should hope for eternal life and cleave unto charity. 
1 And now I, Moroni, write a few of the words of my father Mormon, which he spake concerning faith, hope, and charity; for after this manner did he speak unto the people, as he taught them in the synagogue which they had built for the place of worship. 
2 And now I, Mormon, speak unto you, my beloved brethren; and it is by the grace of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, and his holy will, because of the gift of his calling unto me, that I am permitted to speak unto you at this time. 
3 Wherefore, I would speak unto you that are of the church, that are the peaceable followers of Christ, and that have obtained a sufficient hope by which ye can enter into the rest of the Lord, from this time henceforth until ye shall rest with him in heaven. 
4 And now my brethren, I judge these things of you because of your peaceable walk with the children of men. 
5 For I remember the word of God which saith by their works ye shall know them; for if their works be good, then they are good also. 
6 For behold, God hath said a man being evil cannot do that which is good; for if he offereth a gift, or prayeth unto God, except he shall do it with real intent it profiteth him nothing. 
7 For behold, it is not counted unto him for righteousness. 
8 For behold, if a man being evil giveth a gift, he doeth it grudgingly; wherefore it is counted unto him the same as if he had retained the gift; wherefore he is counted evil before God. 
9 And likewise also is it counted evil unto a man, if he shall pray and not with real intent of heart; yea, and it profiteth him nothing, for God receiveth none such. 
10 Wherefore, a man being evil cannot do that which is good; neither will he give a good gift. 
11 For behold, a bitter fountain cannot bring forth good water; neither can a good fountain bring forth bitter water; wherefore, a man being a servant of the devil cannot follow Christ; and if he follow Christ he cannot be a servant of the devil. 
12 Wherefore, all things which are good cometh of God; and that which is evil cometh of the devil; for the devil is an enemy unto God, and fighteth against him continually, and inviteth and enticeth to sin, and to do that which is evil continually. 
13 But behold, that which is of God inviteth and enticeth to do good continually; wherefore, every thing which inviteth and enticeth to do good, and to love God, and to serve him, is inspired of God. 
14 Wherefore, take heed, my beloved brethren, that ye do not judge that which is evil to be of God, or that which is good and of God to be of the devil. 
15 For behold, my brethren, it is given unto you to judge, that ye may know good from evil; and the way to judge is as plain, that ye may know with a perfect knowledge, as the daylight is from the dark night. 
16 For behold, the Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that he may know good from evil; wherefore, I show unto you the way to judge; for every thing which inviteth to do good, and to persuade to believe in Christ, is sent forth by the power and gift of Christ; wherefore ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of God. 
17 But whatsoever thing persuadeth men to do evil, and believe not in Christ, and deny him, and serve not God, then ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of the devil; for after this manner doth the devil work, for he persuadeth no man to do good, no, not one; neither do his angels; neither do they who subject themselves unto him. 
18 And now, my brethren, seeing that ye know the light by which ye may judge, which light is the light of Christ, see that ye do not judge wrongfully; for with that same judgment which ye judge ye shall also be judged. 
19 Wherefore, I beseech of you, brethren, that ye should search diligently in the light of Christ that ye may know good from evil; and if ye will lay hold upon every good thing, and condemn it not, ye certainly will be a child of Christ. 
20 And now, my brethren, how is it possible that ye can lay hold upon every good thing? 
21 And now I come to that faith, of which I said I would speak; and I will tell you the way whereby ye may lay hold on every good thing. 
22 For behold, God knowing all things, being from everlasting to everlasting, behold, he sent angels to minister unto the children of men, to make manifest concerning the coming of Christ; and in Christ there should come every good thing. 
23 And God also declared unto prophets, by his own mouth, that Christ should come. 
24 And behold, there were divers ways that he did manifest things unto the children of men, which were good; and all things which are good cometh of Christ; otherwise men were fallen, and there could no good thing come unto them. 
25 Wherefore, by the ministering of angels, and by every word which proceeded forth out of the mouth of God, men began to exercise faith in Christ; and thus by faith, they did lay hold upon every good thing; and thus it was until the coming of Christ. 
26 And after that he came men also were saved by faith in his name; and by faith, they become the sons of God. And as surely as Christ liveth he spake these words unto our fathers, saying: Whatsoever thing ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is good, in faith believing that ye shall receive, behold, it shall be done unto you. 
27 Wherefore, my beloved brethren, have miracles ceased because Christ hath ascended into heaven, and hath sat down on the right hand of God, to claim of the Father his rights of mercy which he hath upon the children of men? 
28 For he hath answered the ends of the law, and he claimeth all those who have faith in him; and they who have faith in him will cleave unto every good thing; wherefore he advocateth the cause of the children of men; and he dwelleth eternally in the heavens. 
29 And because he hath done this, my beloved brethren, have miracles ceased? Behold I say unto you, Nay; neither have angels ceased to minister unto the children of men. 
30 For behold, they are subject unto him, to minister according to the word of his command, showing themselves unto them of strong faith and a firm mind in every form of godliness. 
31 And the office of their ministry is to call men unto repentance, and to fulfil and to do the work of the covenants of the Father, which he hath made unto the children of men, to prepare the way among the children of men, by declaring the word of Christ unto the chosen vessels of the Lord, that they may bear testimony of him. 
32 And by so doing, the Lord God prepareth the way that the residue of men may have faith in Christ, that the Holy Ghost may have place in their hearts, according to the power thereof; and after this manner bringeth to pass the Father, the covenants which he hath made unto the children of men. 
33 And Christ hath said: If ye will have faith in me ye shall have power to do whatsoever thing is expedient in me. 
34 And he hath said: Repent all ye ends of the earth, and come unto me, and be baptized in my name, and have faith in me, that ye may be saved. 
35 And now, my beloved brethren, if this be the case that these things are true which I have spoken unto you, and God will show unto you, with power and great glory at the last day, that they are true, and if they are true has the day of miracles ceased? 
36 Or have angels ceased to appear unto the children of men? Or has he withheld the power of the Holy Ghost from them? Or will he, so long as time shall last, or the earth shall stand, or there shall be one man upon the face thereof to be saved? 
37 Behold I say unto you, Nay; for it is by faith that miracles are wrought; and it is by faith that angels appear and minister unto men; wherefore, if these things have ceased wo be unto the children of men, for it is because of unbelief, and all is vain. 
38 For no man can be saved, according to the words of Christ, save they shall have faith in his name; wherefore, if these things have ceased, then has faith ceased also; and awful is the state of man, for they are as though there had been no redemption made. 
39 But behold, my beloved brethren, I judge better things of you, for I judge that ye have faith in Christ because of your meekness; for if ye have not faith in him then ye are not fit to be numbered among the people of his church. 
40 And again, my beloved brethren, I would speak unto you concerning hope. How is it that ye can attain unto faith, save ye shall have hope? 
41 And what is it that ye shall hope for? Behold I say unto you that ye shall have hope through the atonement of Christ and the power of his resurrection, to be raised unto life eternal, and this because of your faith in him according to the promise. 
42 Wherefore, if a man have faith he must needs have hope; for without faith there cannot be any hope. 
43 And again, behold I say unto you that he cannot have faith and hope, save he shall be meek, and lowly of heart. 
44 If so, his faith and hope is vain, for none is acceptable before God, save the meek and lowly in heart; and if a man be meek and lowly in heart, and confesses by the power of the Holy Ghost that Jesus is the Christ, he must needs have charity; for if he have not charity he is nothing; wherefore he must needs have charity. 
45 And charity suffereth long, and is kind, and envieth not, and is not puffed up, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil, and rejoiceth not in iniquity but rejoiceth in the truth, beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things. 
46 Wherefore, my beloved brethren, if ye have not charity, ye are nothing, for charity never faileth. Wherefore, cleave unto charity, which is the greatest of all, for all things must fail— 
47 But charity is the pure love of Christ, and it endureth forever; and whoso is found possessed of it at the last day, it shall be well with him. 
48 Wherefore, my beloved brethren, pray unto the Father with all the energy of heart, that ye may be filled with this love, which he hath bestowed upon all who are true followers of his Son, Jesus Christ; that ye may become the sons of God; that when he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is; that we may have this hope; that we may be purified even as he is pure. Amen. 


CHAPTER 8 
The baptism of little children is an evil abomination—Little children are alive in Christ because of the Atonement—Faith, repentance, meekness and lowliness of heart, receiving the Holy Ghost, and enduring to the end lead to salvation. 
1 An epistle of my father Mormon, written to me, Moroni; and it was written unto me soon after my calling to the ministry. And on this wise did he write unto me, saying: 
2 My beloved son, Moroni, I rejoice exceedingly that your Lord Jesus Christ hath been mindful of you, and hath called you to his ministry, and to his holy work. 
3 I am mindful of you always in my prayers, continually praying unto God the Father in the name of his Holy Child, Jesus, that he, through his infinite goodness and grace, will keep you through the endurance of faith on his name to the end. 
4 And now, my son, I speak unto you concerning that which grieveth me exceedingly; for it grieveth me that there should disputations rise among you. 
5 For, if I have learned the truth, there have been disputations among you concerning the baptism of your little children. 
6 And now, my son, I desire that ye should labor diligently, that this gross error should be removed from among you; for, for this intent I have written this epistle. 
7 For immediately after I had learned these things of you I inquired of the Lord concerning the matter. And the word of the Lord came to me by the power of the Holy Ghost, saying: 
8 Listen to the words of Christ, your Redeemer, your Lord and your God. Behold, I came into the world not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance; the whole need no physician, but they that are sick; wherefore, little children are whole, for they are not capable of committing sin; wherefore the curse of Adam is taken from them in me, that it hath no power over them; and the law of circumcision is done away in me. 
9 And after this manner did the Holy Ghost manifest the word of God unto me; wherefore, my beloved son, I know that it is solemn mockery before God, that ye should baptize little children. 
10 Behold I say unto you that this thing shall ye teach—repentance and baptism unto those who are accountable and capable of committing sin; yea, teach parents that they must repent and be baptized, and humble themselves as their little children, and they shall all be saved with their little children. 
11 And their little children need no repentance, neither baptism. Behold, baptism is unto repentance to the fulfilling the commandments unto the remission of sins. 
12 But little children are alive in Christ, even from the foundation of the world; if not so, God is a partial God, and also a changeable God, and a respecter to persons; for how many little children have died without baptism! 
13 Wherefore, if little children could not be saved without baptism, these must have gone to an endless hell. 
14 Behold I say unto you, that he that supposeth that little children need baptism is in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity; for he hath neither faith, hope, nor charity; wherefore, should he be cut off while in the thought, he must go down to hell. 
15 For awful is the wickedness to suppose that God saveth one child because of baptism, and the other must perish because he hath no baptism. 
16 Wo be unto them that shall pervert the ways of the Lord after this manner, for they shall perish except they repent. Behold, I speak with boldness, having authority from God; and I fear not what man can do; for perfect love casteth out all fear. 
17 And I am filled with charity, which is everlasting love; wherefore, all children are alike unto me; wherefore, I love little children with a perfect love; and they are all alike and partakers of salvation. 
18 For I know that God is not a partial God, neither a changeable being; but he is unchangeable from all eternity to all eternity. 
19 Little children cannot repent; wherefore, it is awful wickedness to deny the pure mercies of God unto them, for they are all alive in him because of his mercy. 
20 And he that saith that little children need baptism denieth the mercies of Christ, and setteth at naught the atonement of him and the power of his redemption. 
21 Wo unto such, for they are in danger of death, hell, and an endless torment. I speak it boldly; God hath commanded me. Listen unto them and give heed, or they stand against you at the judgment-seat of Christ. 
22 For behold that all little children are alive in Christ, and also all they that are without the law. For the power of redemption cometh on all them that have no law; wherefore, he that is not condemned, or he that is under no condemnation, cannot repent; and unto such baptism availeth nothing— 
23 But it is mockery before God, denying the mercies of Christ, and the power of his Holy Spirit, and putting trust in dead works. 
24 Behold, my son, this thing ought not to be; for repentance is unto them that are under condemnation and under the curse of a broken law. 
25 And the first fruits of repentance is baptism; and baptism cometh by faith unto the fulfilling the commandments; and the fulfilling the commandments bringeth remission of sins; 
26 And the remission of sins bringeth meekness, and lowliness of heart; and because of meekness and lowliness of heart cometh the visitation of the Holy Ghost, which Comforter filleth with hope and perfect love, which love endureth by diligence unto prayer, until the end shall come, when all the saints shall dwell with God. 
27 Behold, my son, I will write unto you again if I go not out soon against the Lamanites. Behold, the pride of this nation, or the people of the Nephites, hath proven their destruction except they should repent. 
28 Pray for them, my son, that repentance may come unto them. But behold, I fear lest the Spirit hath ceased striving with them; and in this part of the land they are also seeking to put down all power and authority which cometh from God; and they are denying the Holy Ghost. 
29 And after rejecting so great a knowledge, my son, they must perish soon, unto the fulfilling of the prophecies which were spoken by the prophets, as well as the words of our Savior himself. 
30 Farewell, my son, until I shall write unto you, or shall meet you again. Amen. 
CHAPTER 9 
Both the Nephites and the Lamanites are depraved and degenerate—They torture and murder each other—Mormon prays that grace and goodness may rest upon Moroni forever. The second epistle of Mormon to his son Moroni. 
1 My beloved son, I write unto you again that ye may know that I am yet alive; but I write somewhat of that which is grievous. 
2 For behold, I have had a sore battle with the Lamanites, in which we did not conquer; and Archeantus has fallen by the sword, and also Luram and Emron; yea, and we have lost a great number of our choice men. 
3 And now behold, my son, I fear lest the Lamanites shall destroy this people; for they do not repent, and Satan stirreth them up continually to anger one with another. 
4 Behold, I am laboring with them continually; and when I speak the word of God with sharpness they tremble and anger against me; and when I use no sharpness they harden their hearts against it; wherefore, I fear lest the Spirit of the Lord hath ceased striving with them. 
5 For so exceedingly do they anger that it seemeth me that they have no fear of death; and they have lost their love, one towards another; and they thirst after blood and revenge continually. 
6 And now, my beloved son, notwithstanding their hardness, let us labor diligently; for if we should cease to labor, we should be brought under condemnation; for we have a labor to perform whilst in this tabernacle of clay, that we may conquer the enemy of all righteousness, and rest our souls in the kingdom of God. 
7 And now I write somewhat concerning the sufferings of this people. For according to the knowledge which I have received from Amoron, behold, the Lamanites have many prisoners, which they took from the tower of Sherrizah; and there were men, women, and children. 
8 And the husbands and fathers of those women and children they have slain; and they feed the women upon the flesh of their husbands, and the children upon the flesh of their fathers; and no water, save a little, do they give unto them. 
9 And notwithstanding this great abomination of the Lamanites, it doth not exceed that of our people in Moriantum. For behold, many of the daughters of the Lamanites have they taken prisoners; and after depriving them of that which was most dear and precious above all things, which is chastity and virtue— 
10 And after they had done this thing, they did murder them in a most cruel manner, torturing their bodies even unto death; and after they have done this, they devour their flesh like unto wild beasts, because of the hardness of their hearts; and they do it for a token of bravery. 
11 O my beloved son, how can a people like this, that are without civilization— 
12 (And only a few years have passed away, and they were a civil and a delightsome people) 
13 But O my son, how can a people like this, whose delight is in so much abomination— 
14 How can we expect that God will stay his hand in judgment against us? 
15 Behold, my heart cries: Wo unto this people. Come out in judgment, O God, and hide their sins, and wickedness, and abominations from before thy face! 
16 And again, my son, there are many widows and their daughters who remain in Sherrizah; and that part of the provisions which the Lamanites did not carry away, behold, the army of Zenephi has carried away, and left them to wander whithersoever they can for food; and many old women do faint by the way and die. 
17 And the army which is with me is weak; and the armies of the Lamanites are betwixt Sherrizah and me; and as many as have fled to the army of Aaron have fallen victims to their awful brutality. 
18 O the depravity of my people! They are without order and without mercy. Behold, I am but a man, and I have but the strength of a man, and I cannot any longer enforce my commands. 
19 And they have become strong in their perversion; and they are alike brutal, sparing none, neither old nor young; and they delight in everything save that which is good; and the suffering of our women and our children upon all the face of this land doth exceed everything; yea, tongue cannot tell, neither can it be written. 
20 And now, my son, I dwell no longer upon this horrible scene. Behold, thou knowest the wickedness of this people; thou knowest that they are without principle, and past feeling; and their wickedness doth exceed that of the Lamanites. 
21 Behold, my son, I cannot recommend them unto God lest he should smite me. 
22 But behold, my son, I recommend thee unto God, and I trust in Christ that thou wilt be saved; and I pray unto God that he will spare thy life, to witness the return of his people unto him, or their utter destruction; for I know that they must perish except they repent and return unto him. 
23 And if they perish it will be like unto the Jaredites, because of the wilfulness of their hearts, seeking for blood and revenge. 
24 And if it so be that they perish, we know that many of our brethren have deserted over unto the Lamanites, and many more will also desert over unto them; wherefore, write somewhat a few things, if thou art spared and I shall perish and not see thee; but I trust that I may see thee soon; for I have sacred records that I would deliver up unto thee. 
25 My son, be faithful in Christ; and may not the things which I have written grieve thee, to weigh thee down unto death; but may Christ lift thee up, and may his sufferings and death, and the showing his body unto our fathers, and his mercy and long-suffering, and the hope of his glory and of eternal life, rest in your mind forever. 
26 And may the grace of God the Father, whose throne is high in the heavens, and our Lord Jesus Christ, who sitteth on the right hand of his power, until all things shall become subject unto him, be, and abide with you forever. Amen. 


CHAPTER 10 
A testimony of the Book of Mormon comes by the power of the Holy Ghost—The gifts of the Spirit are dispensed to the faithful—Spiritual gifts always accompany faith—Moroni’s words speak from the dust—Come unto Christ, be perfected in Him, and sanctify your souls. 
1 Now I, Moroni, write somewhat as seemeth me good; and I write unto my brethren, the Lamanites; and I would that they should know that more than four hundred and twenty years have passed away since the sign was given of the coming of Christ. 
2 And I seal up these records, after I have spoken a few words by way of exhortation unto you. 
3 Behold, I would exhort you that when ye shall read these things, if it be wisdom in God that ye should read them, that ye would remember how merciful the Lord hath been unto the children of men, from the creation of Adam even down until the time that ye shall receive these things, and ponder it in your hearts. 
4 And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost. 
5 And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things. 
6 And whatsoever thing is good is just and true; wherefore, nothing that is good denieth the Christ, but acknowledgeth that he is. 
7 And ye may know that he is, by the power of the Holy Ghost; wherefore I would exhort you that ye deny not the power of God; for he worketh by power, according to the faith of the children of men, the same today and tomorrow, and forever. 
8 And again, I exhort you, my brethren, that ye deny not the gifts of God, for they are many; and they come from the same God. And there are different ways that these gifts are administered; but it is the same God who worketh all in all; and they are given by the manifestations of the Spirit of God unto men, to profit them. 
9 For behold, to one is given by the Spirit of God, that he may teach the word of wisdom; 
10 And to another, that he may teach the word of knowledge by the same Spirit; 
11 And to another, exceedingly great faith; and to another, the gifts of healing by the same Spirit; 
12 And again, to another, that he may work mighty miracles; 
13 And again, to another, that he may prophesy concerning all things; 
14 And again, to another, the beholding of angels and ministering spirits; 
15 And again, to another, all kinds of tongues; 
16 And again, to another, the interpretation of languages and of divers kinds of tongues. 
17 And all these gifts come by the Spirit of Christ; and they come unto every man severally, according as he will. 
18 And I would exhort you, my beloved brethren, that ye remember that every good gift cometh of Christ. 
19 And I would exhort you, my beloved brethren, that ye remember that he is the same yesterday, today, and forever, and that all these gifts of which I have spoken, which are spiritual, never will be done away, even as long as the world shall stand, only according to the unbelief of the children of men. 
20 Wherefore, there must be faith; and if there must be faith there must also be hope; and if there must be hope there must also be charity. 
21 And except ye have charity ye can in nowise be saved in the kingdom of God; neither can ye be saved in the kingdom of God if ye have not faith; neither can ye if ye have no hope. 
22 And if ye have no hope ye must needs be in despair; and despair cometh because of iniquity. 
23 And Christ truly said unto our fathers: If ye have faith ye can do all things which are expedient unto me. 
24 And now I speak unto all the ends of the earth—that if the day cometh that the power and gifts of God shall be done away among you, it shall be because of unbelief. 
25 And wo be unto the children of men if this be the case; for there shall be none that doeth good among you, no not one. For if there be one among you that doeth good, he shall work by the power and gifts of God. 
26 And wo unto them who shall do these things away and die, for they die in their sins, and they cannot be saved in the kingdom of God; and I speak it according to the words of Christ; and I lie not. 
27 And I exhort you to remember these things; for the time speedily cometh that ye shall know that I lie not, for ye shall see me at the bar of God; and the Lord God will say unto you: Did I not declare my words unto you, which were written by this man, like as one crying from the dead, yea, even as one speaking out of the dust? 
28 I declare these things unto the fulfilling of the prophecies. And behold, they shall proceed forth out of the mouth of the everlasting God; and his word shall hiss forth from generation to generation. 


29 And God shall show unto you, that that which I have written is true. 
30 And again I would exhort you that ye would come unto Christ, and lay hold upon every good gift, and touch not the evil gift, nor the unclean thing. 
31 And awake, and arise from the dust, O Jerusalem; yea, and put on thy beautiful garments, O daughter of Zion; and strengthen thy stakes and enlarge thy borders forever, that thou mayest no more be confounded, that the covenants of the Eternal Father which he hath made unto thee, O house of Israel, may be fulfilled. 
32 Yea, come unto Christ, and be perfected in him, and deny yourselves of all ungodliness; and if ye shall deny yourselves of all ungodliness, and love God with all your might, mind and strength, then is his grace sufficient for you, that by his grace ye may be perfect in Christ; and if by the grace of God ye are perfect in Christ, ye can in nowise deny the power of God. 
33 And again, if ye by the grace of God are perfect in Christ, and deny not his power, then are ye sanctified in Christ by the grace of God, through the shedding of the blood of Christ, which is in the covenant of the Father unto the remission of your sins, that ye become holy, without spot. 
34 And now I bid unto all, farewell. I soon go to rest in the paradise of God, until my spirit and body shall again reunite, and I am brought forth triumphant through the air, to meet you before the pleasing bar of the great Jehovah, the Eternal Judge of both quick and dead. Amen.
________________




THE THIRD BOOK OF MORONI 
THE SON OF MORMON, 
WHO ABRIDGED THE NEPHITE RECORD 
The words of Moroni, as recorded in the Book of the Nem, once he had come to Mentina at the end of the Great War between the Lamanites and the Nephites. 
CHAPTER 1 
1 I am Moroni, the same that called by the Nephites, Moroni. My father was that same Mormon who served as captain of the armies of the Nephites, as were, and I too did serve as their captain for but a brief time. And the account of my service unto the Nephites and the terrible end to which they eventually fell I have written in another book and I have hid it up within the earth even as I was commanded to do. 
2 And I have taken up my abode among the Nem, for I am descended from Nephi and also from Hagoth. Wherefore, I have returned again unto my own people. 
3 And I write in this book concerning all my doings among the people of the Land Northward. I especially wish to give account of Heinmet, who was high priest of Mentina before I returned. Yea, I wish to give tribute to him. 
4 Heinmet was the son of Pa Nat and Ishimhah and just as his mother did learn and become great listening at the feet of the high priests of Mentina, so then also did her son. Yea, Heinmet was a man great in wisdom and in zeal for the ways of the Lord, even from his youth. And behold, the Lord was with him and He did walk with Heinmet upon the Way. 
5 And Heinmet gained favor with the Lord and also with the people of Mentina, insomuch that the Council made him high priest of the city. And he did fill the seat with justice and equity. Yea, I must say that, by all accounts, he administered his calling in perfection. 
6 Now, there came in upon the Nem in all regions of the Land Northward a great fear and dread that the same that was transpiring in the Land Southward might also begin to take place in the lands of the Nem. And none saw this more clearly than Heinmet. Wherefore, he did call a Great Council of the Peli of the thirteen principal cities and they met in the city of Witchittim. 
7 And this city was on the southern-most border of the lands of the Nem, for they had long abandoned the region round about the great gulf in the south unto the people of the Land Southward who had colonized and built settlements there. But Witchittim was in the plains along the northern borders of the gulf region. And it was this city in which my family resided. 
8 In this Great Council, Heinmet gave counsel to all the Peli of the principle cities that they should make preparation for war, which was surely to come out of the Land Southward. It was his opinion that every city ought to build earthworks such as those built by that Moroni of old who protected the Nephites from the Lamanites. Wherefore, it was decided by the Council that each of the principal cities would take counsel among themselves and determine the best defenses that could be devised for their situation. 
9 And the city of Witchittim cast up earth in a great ring around the city. And without this ring, they caused timber battlements to be built. Within the ring of earth, they caused pits and moats to be dug. And within this they caused more timber battlements to be built. And to enter into the city, one had to pass through a narrow gate in the outer battlement and turn and proceed a great distance to reach the gate in the earthen ring. Having passed the second gate, to continue into the city, one was then required to proceed carefully around the pits and over the moats. Then, when all the pits and moats were passed, one entered the city through a gate in the inner battlement. And this was devised so that any enemy would be forced to expose themselves to battle on all sides in order to take the city. 
10 Now, to build such a defense required that the Nem gather from all the region round about in order to provide the labor necessary. And the people left their villages and their settlements from the region round about Witchittim and they lived in one great settlement outside the city. 
11 And this is part of the great evil which Heinmet lay upon himself, that the people were constrained to leave their farms and their homes in order to come in great numbers to build up the strong places. For, it had always been the custom among the Nem to allow no city to grow larger in population than between one or two hundred families. 
12 Yea, even the great cities of Mentina and Corianton had no greater population, for, it was believed that the land could not bear any more and that the people only cooperated well in such numbers. Wherefore, whenever populations of a certain city grew to above that which was considered good stewardship of the land, a new settlement was begun a goodly distance from the city. And this was the manner in which the Nem filled the whole land with people, but still did not overtax the land upon which their people relied. 
13 But behold, because of the threat and the fear of war, the Great Council of Witchittim encouraged the people to discard that which had served them for so many generations. Yea, they began to gather very large populations indeed, in order that they might speedily complete the work of defense. 
14 And this is not all. The Council encouraged the building of a great army for the defense of the people in the southern borders of the land. And in order to provision it, the cities were asked to produce more and to send it to the army. 
15 Now, the cities were built around a certain population and a certain need, and the inhabitants were accustomed to producing according to that need. And behold, the need was visible to all and required no accounting or verification. Wherefore, the people were content to have all things in common and to produce sufficient for their own need and a little extra for trade and to provide for the needs of their neighbors and any sojourners in the land. 
16 But, when there came a need to provision thousands of men in the field, men who worked for the security of the nation but not for their own upkeep, the cities were required to increase their production to meet that need. Now, this was exceedingly difficult to do, for each city was built such and founded such that they need not produce above the land’s ability to bear it. And this had always been a dictum of the people and a byword. 
17 But when cities must increase their population in order to build defenses, they must support that added populace. This was impossible because of the manner in which the cities were organized and laid out. Wherefore, great tracts of land round about the cities had to be opened up for production and this was not possible in most cases. 
18 The other cities of the Nem were asked to produce more and to distribute less to its citizens, the surplus being made available to the great cities of defense and to support the workers in the defense projects. And this became a great drag on the other cities. 
19 In addition to this, a population of men at arms was quickly built up which was vastly greater than the population of any of the cities of the Nem. This constituted a great, moving city in and of itself. What is more, this moving city was a destroyer of land and a consumer of surplus, to the extent that to quarter the army in any one place became a great burden and a curse to any city. 
20 This was entirely foreign to the customs of the people and many cities, though they did not actually rebel against the Great Council, they found it difficult to comply with its decisions. Because of this, there began to be some division in the land, for some cities were built in regions with greater capacity than others. These cities became more important to the work of defense than others and they began to exalt themselves above their neighbors. 
21 Wherefore, during this period it cannot be said that the Nem had all things in common. And we cannot say that they were all of one heart and one mind, for differences and some strife did exist among them. And it is this to which Heinmet took responsibility later in his life and he upbraided himself. 
22 And we cannot sit in judgment of Heinmet and the other Peli who formed the Great Council. Was the threat not real? Was the war not at our doors? I say unto you, It was. I know this, for I did also lead the Nephites into battle, even down to their last destruction. I know that the war did come into the Land Northward just as Heinmet feared and prophesied. Behold, he laid down the seat of high priest before the battle spread up into the lands of the Nem, but I prosecuted the war even unto the end. And I held my father as he died upon the field. And did that not take place well up into the Land Northward? I say unto you, It did. 
23 We must not judge Heinmet as he did judge himself. For, his vision was correct and his prophecy was fulfilled. But, the course that he and the Council decided upon was reactionary and did serve to undermine the foundation of all that was Nem. 
24 But behold, Heinmet did give up the seat of high priest of Mentina and, in the last few years of his life, he did travel from one Council to another recommending to them that they disband their armies and break down their battlements. And many of the cities that were farther to the North and the West did follow his instruction. And it was because of his instruction that the great army that the Nem had built up and maintained for so many years was disbanded. 
25 And those men who had been trained in the work of war did train up others within their own communities against the need for any future muster. But behold, never again in my lifetime did the Nem raise a great army. 
26 And Heinmet also taught the Councils that the people ought to watch carefully the progress of the war as it made its way into the Land Northward so that they might retreat before it. 
27 Now this was a good strategy. For the war did ravage the Land Southward and as the Nephites were driven by the Lamanites and the Gadiantons they did move out of the Land Southward up into the gulf region of the Land Northward. Yea, even as my father strove with the Nephites, they did move ever northward, even until the last battle, which was far to the north and along the Eastern Sea. 
28 But the Nem watched from a distance and were able to move their people out of the way of the war and were not discovered by the combatants. Behold, it is a wonder to me that the Nem were so proficient at removing their populations inland and away from the approaching armies. For, although my father and I knew of their cities and settlements that ought to have lain directly in our path, we did not encounter any people in our march. Behold, we did encounter earthen works and abandoned towns and settlements, but we did not see even one of the Nem, and neither did our enemy. 
29 And this was because of the great counsel that Heinmet gave unto the people, that they should move themselves before the approaching hosts and not make themselves known unto them. Behold, they were not discovered and they remained free from the work of death into which we had thrust ourselves. 
30 Wherefore, judge now the wisdom and the foresight of Heinmet. For, I do believe that he upbraided himself well; for all that, he had nearly destroyed the Nem way of life and even the foundations of Zion in the land. But I also believe that he did judge himself too much. For his counsels, after he had begun to work among all the Nem, were good and did save the nation. 
31 Yea, it must be admitted that his policy of retreating before the approaching hosts of the Nephites and the Lamanites was very effective. For both armies were very much concerned with the day’s fighting and not very much interested in the country round about. And almost they did believe that the land was empty of inhabitants. Wherefore, all the Nephites and the Lamanites did concern themselves only with that which was necessary to maintain their great armies. And, since the few people they did happen to find in the land had nothing with which they esteemed of any value to the sustaining of their armies, they left them entirely to themselves. 
32 This was a great blessing unto the Nem because it afforded them more opportunity to remove themselves from before them, a thing that might have been made more difficult had the armies paid much attention to them. 
33 And all the Nephites of the gulf region became caught up in the war. Yea, and they went into the armies: man, woman and child. And the women and children did follow the trains, serving the needs of the army, leaving their cities and their towns desolate. 
34 And they took with them all their belongings. Yea, they carried with them in the trains all their precious things. Wherefore, these things were the prize of the Lamanites and the Gadiantons who led them. And they were also the prize of the wicked among the Nephites, for there were many Gadiantons among them also. And it is easy, then, to see how both armies, because of their lust for riches and for the shedding of blood, could so completely ignore the existence of even a greater host of people than they comprised. Yea, they could see only themselves and this was enough to satisfy all. 
35 And the Nem evacuated the settlements and cities before the armies of the Nephites and the Lamanites knew not of their existence. Wherefore, only those directly in the path of the war were discovered by either host, and these they found empty of spoil. But there was no time at all to ponder over the ghostly attitude of these cities, for they were ever pressed for the necessity of the war and they could not stay overlong in an unprofitable region. 
36 And the hosts consumed all before them. And so great were the hosts that much country that might have been employed industriously and with providence was trampled into unserviceable mud. 
37 Can you imagine the sight? Can you imagine millions of men with their women and children, and all their baggage, traveling through unknown territory? Can you imagine the desolation simply in the necessity of making their cook fires? Can you imagine the stench they left behind them from the waste of their bodies? Then, I would ask you, can you imagine the wasteland created by the great battles that took place and the necessity of burning the bodies of the fallen? 
38 If you can, then you can imagine the effect that so great a war has upon any land. Such was the destruction in the gulf region and along the Eastern Sea as the Nephites battled to destroy themselves and all before them. Yea, if you can, then you can envision the fruits of the great preparations to which the Nephites went in order to defend themselves against their enemies. Their defense became their ruination and they went from the shedding of blood to the shedding of blood. 
39 So shall be the effect of all great bodies of men and women who take the field together. And had the Nem rallied to the cause of the Nephites or the Lamanites, for the Nem might have claimed them both, they should have been caught up in a like destruction. Therefore, I exhort you once again: Let not any man judge the counsels and teachings of Heinmet, for they were just. And behold, before he died he did recuperate his honor by the great counsel wherewith he did save the Nem. 


CHAPTER 2 
1 Behold, I have written an account of all my dealings with the Nephites and they are kept safe and sound in the library of Corianton in Cumorah. And I will not write them here, for this record is for another purpose and for another people. Wherefore, I have sealed up that other record in a sacred place for a good purpose in the Lord, and also being directed by Him. He has also shown me upon the Way that the same who receive my records of the Nephites and Lamanites shall also receive of other records, among which shall be these words that I leave for the remnant of my own seed and that the combination of all the records preserved and brought forth by the Lord shall be of great use to them who shall receive them in the last days. 
2 This record I write in accordance with the will of the Nem, among whom I do now live. And it is also for a good purpose in the Lord that I write on these plates the things that transpired after the great Nephite war, a war wherein a good people became filled with evil, even to their own destruction. For behold, there are no more Nephites in the land. Yea, they are all gone. And if any survived the horrible work of death that swallowed up their people, they have become Nem and are no more called Nephite or Jacobite, Josephite or Zoramite. 
3 Now, when the last of the battles ended, and thus ended the Nephite race and nation, behold, the Lamanites did search diligently and with much energy in all the land for any Nephite who had survived. And, when they found any, they subjected them to horrible torture and caused that they should deny the Christ. And any who would not deny the Christ was put to death. 
4 And behold, as they sought their enemies, they did often come upon settlements of the Nem. But behold, these they esteemed to be of no interest or benefit to them because they represented themselves as nomadic wanderers in the wilderness. Wherefore, the Lamanites could ascertain no gain from them and left them to themselves. 
5 And these wanderers never had any knowledge of Nephites, or of any other manner of -ites, being uncivilized wanderers. For they presented themselves as simpletons unto the Lamanites, and primitives. And behold, in this way they did camouflage themselves before the Lamanites, that they might not be recognized as the great nation that they were. But they did always move before the Lamanites and were never found in the same place twice. 
6 And it was not long before the Lamanites were forced to give up the search for the escaped Nephites. For, they were concerned for their own nation and had already felt the need of provisioning their armies. And behold, this proved the undoing of the Lamanites, just as surely as it had almost undone the Nem. 
7 For they had become a ravenous people, going from plunder to plunder. And even before the war they were a wild people and did not much to maintain themselves except to hunt and to steal, and those who had maintained homes and fields had long since left them far away in the Land Southward. And this had been their way of life before the war, to take from the land what spoil they could. For they went from battle to battle and had no means of support but the land. 
8 But when the war was completed and the enemy utterly destroyed, the Lamanite armies still lacked any support. They were quickly disbanded and the land was filled with roving bands and brigands. Behold, some of them gathered together for their own protection. But, the greater part of them continued with the war, fighting their own people and killing even their own brethren because of the great want of food. 
9 And before three years had passed all organization had utterly collapsed and the more part of the Lamanites had returned into the Land Southward. Those that stayed behind formed small settlements and villages in a string of outposts along the shore of the sea from far in the north down even unto the gulf region. And they progressed not at all from that time but subsisted on what food and shelter the forests could provide. And behold, the Lamanites that stayed in the Land Northward after the great battle became exactly as they perceived the Nem to be, for they moved about idly, barely able to provide for more than themselves alone. 
10 And the Nem kept aloof from them, except to keep abreast of their movements. But they did not trade more than animal skins with them, that they might continue to support the belief that they were no different than themselves. Wherefore, they kept up a deception with the Lamanites and did not interact very much with them. 
11 For behold, had they allowed the Lamanites knowledge of their cities farther inland and to the north, they would have sought to make war upon them, being attracted to their prosperity. Wherefore, they continued to deceive the Lamanites. 
12 And behold, this deception was adequate to prevent the Lamanites from discovering them. And the villages and settlements of the Lamanites left in the land did very poorly and many failed. And this is because they knew not much about the land and the seasons of this new land. And they knew not how harsh the living was. For, they had come from a lush land that was full of provender. But the Land Northward required great effort during the growing months in order to survive the winter. And the Lamanites were unaccustomed to such labor. Wherefore, the more part of them died in the first winter and more died in the second. Behold, by the third winter, there were precious few remaining. 
13 And those that remained were humbled by the land and they had ceased to strive one with another and to live by plunder, but had used the year to lay aside that which was needed for the winter. And they built structures and shelters and ceased to run naked among the forests. And in all ways they began to behave more like men than beasts. 
14 And unto those did the Nem send emissaries to teach them. Yea, they did send first some here and some there to trade and converse. Then, when the character of the settlements that remained was ascertained, they did send teachers and healers to live with them. And behold, the Lamanites that remained in the Land Northward did begin to see wisdom and they did begin to change in their hearts and repent. 
15 And this should come as no surprise. For, even unto the end of the Great War, the Lamanites were the more righteous than the Nephites. I do not mean for any to believe that they were less ferocious than the Nephites, but they were more easily taught and more easily humbled because of the exceedingly humble circumstances out of which many of them had come before the war. 
16 And also I would have you recall that these were left in the land by the end of the third winter only because they had cast off the work of death and of wickedness to which the more part of the Lamanites had turned, that they might work to secure their own survival in the new land. Wherefore, they were ready to be taught. 
17 And unto these did the Nem venture and they were converted. And when they were converted, they did not advertise to the Lamanites of the Land Southward all their doings. For, the Lamanites who had returned unto the Land Southward returned unto their own places and each city ruled its own people. And behold, each city did battle with its neighbors. Wherefore, there was little trade and little concourse and the converted Lamanites saw greater necessity in maintaining good relations with their neighbors which they had so recently discovered were vastly greater and stronger than they. 
18 And in the space of not many years the Lamanites who had stayed in the Land Northward had been converted, if not to the ways and customs, and indeed into the families of the Nem, then at least into allies and good neighbors, no longer being filled with the hatred that motivated them to come into the land in pursuit of blood. And behold, there was no enemy in the land equally determined to shed their blood. Therefore, they were content to interact in a peaceful way with the Nem, for they did not esteem them to be enemies of any kind. 
19 But the Nem did not renew the cities and settlements in the more southern portions of the land but preferred to encourage the Lamanites to settle there. For it was a land that the Nem had never settled, for it had long been considered part of the lands of the Nephites. Wherefore, the Nem preferred that the Lamanites, who had become friendly neighbors, occupy that portion of the land. 
20 Now, this I believed was a mistake. For, I had more experience with the inhabitants of the Land Southward, be they Lamanite or Nephite, and I feared that because of their way of life and because of their history, the Lamanites would begin again to build and to gain substance. And with this substance they would begin to puff themselves again in pride and lose all the humility that the harshness of the climate in the Land Northward had taught them. Behold, it was my belief that this would bring again the Gadiantons into the land and that it would be a great source of strife and of misery to the Nem who must come after us. 
21 But the Nem could not drive them out of the land without alerting their brethren in the Land Southward of their presence. And they could not support an army large enough to do it without destroying their own society. Therefore, it was deemed better that the Lamanites left in the land be influenced to settle the great empty spaces of the gulf where the climate was more to their liking. And the Nem hoped that they might one day be convinced to become part of their people. 
22 And I went with some few other of the Nem who were of like mind as myself across the great plain and we took up our residence in the great city of Mentina. And I am told that the settlements of the Lamanites were all but abandoned along the Eastern Sea, to the effect that, the Great War, whereby the Nephite race was extinguished, within a few short years became all but a memory to the people. 


CHAPTER 3 
1 Now, when I arrived at the city of Mentina, the Council had not yet called anyone to take the place of Heinmet, whom they still considered high priest, though he had long been absent from the city. 
2 And I took up a stewardship smelting ore and building implements and tools for use by the people. I used the skill that my father had taught me to smelt out various ores and to make durable metals. And, because I felt comfortable and at ease at the forge, the Nem called me the Salamander, which is an implement used in the drawing of the heated metal out of the forge. 
3 And the granddaughter of Pa Nat, even the niece of this same Heinmet of whom I have written, did please me very much. And we had known each other from our youths, but she had grown into a great woman and had not married. 
4 Now, I had not married, for I knew not what end I might make. But when I took up my stewardship in Mentina and I saw that the path before me was not one of war and continual hardship, I desired to marry and to live as other men do. And I seized upon Pa Hinent, the daughter of Pa Hanat and she consented to become my wife. 
5 And we lived happily in Mentina and had sons and daughters. And these are the names of our sons: Shioni, Moroni, Shinet and Pahoran. And these are the names of our daughters: Pa Nathah and Pa Hanatim. 
6 And we desired not to live within the city, for the number of families in the city had grown to very many during the stewardship of Heinmet, and such is the same in all the principal cities of the Nem of the mountains. For, they had gathered in all the people round about to provide for their own defense and the population of the city was become very great. Yea, there were in excess of two thousand families crowded in the city and many of their houses were built upon piers that extended out upon the lake. 
7 But behold, this is much smaller than it was before Heinmet began to return to the tradition of the fathers. For, before he went out to all the principal cities of the Nem to preach a return to the policies of the past, there were more than twenty thousand families within the city precincts. 
8 But I remembered that the Nem did in times past restrict their cities to one or two hundred families and I did not want to raise my children in anything but a Nem city. And we departed out of Mentina with a few friends and we did build a tower upon a prominence along the mountains north of Mentina and below it in the hollow we established a new settlement in the valley of Mentina. And we called our settlement Elak Kowa, which means to return again. And we numbered four families. 
9 Nevertheless, the people of the city of Mentina considered our settlement to be part of that principal city and the Council of Mentina, having left the seat of the high priest vacant since Heinmet’s departure, did call me to that position. Wherefore, I became the high priest of Mentina. 
10 And thirty-eight years have passed since the end of the great Nephite and Lamanite war, and since I delivered up the records of the Nephite to the library of Corianton, which is near even unto Cumorah. And I have traveled over all of the Land Northward searching out those Nephites who might have escaped the war and have found only a few. And when I found any of them in the waste places or residing in any of the cities or settlements of the Nem, I did exhort them to remove themselves and their families even unto Elak Kowa. For, I feared that they might infect the Nem with that spirit which did drive them unto their own utter destruction. And to assure that they turned not again unto that spirit, I did bring them in unto my own city in order that I might help them in their repentance. 
11 For behold, the Nephites, as also the Lamanites, had lost their minds in the war. And they had no more the promptings of the Holy Ghost, nor any good gift, but went from the shedding of blood to the shedding of blood. Yea, revenge and the work of death were their only concentration and they were blind to all else. And does a man lose such a spirit when the war is over? I say unto you, It lingers long in the hearts of men. Wherefore behold, I wanted a generation to pass away without that this spirit might take root anywhere among the Nem. 
12 For it is very true that the thoughts that occupy the mind, and the words with which a man speaks continually to himself, do cause the very same to take place in actual reality. And this is according to the teachings of Timothy. Yea, doubt it not, for Timothy taught that faith moves upon matter, and that matter moves upon other matter, and so forth. And as this movement makes its course outward, behold, it is also at the same moment returning again unto its source. Wherefore, if the source is a mind and a heart so filled with hate that the man is capable of going from the shedding of blood to the shedding of blood, then that faith returns again unto him magnified. And behold, I say unto you, There is no more any place for the works of charity and kindness. For the despair builds upon the despair and is sent out again, only to be magnified again and again. 
13 It is easy for us to contemplate the workings of faith when they have to do with great miracles. But, there is an opposition in the creation and none can retreat from it or avoid it in any way. Truly, that thought or desire that does rise up in the heart of man is magnified, and if he acts upon that desire, it also is magnified. And, if the thing is evil and he repents not of it, the thing is magnified in him, for the world is one eternal round. Of a surety, when that evil returns unto him, for what man can avoid his actions returning, shall it not encounter faith? I say unto you, It shall, though it be bent toward the doing of evil. And, finding in the heart of the man that which is required by the universal law, that evil found there shall be the very matter utilized to fill the void left by the first outcry. Wherefore, great becomes the evil in the hearts of men, lest they repent speedily. 
14 And if they repent, it is by this same law that the evil is diminished, or even extinguished in him. For returning unto its origin, the cause encounters faith of a different kind and this is utilized to fill the void. And, if the penitence is great enough, even the evil might be extinguished. 
15 And behold, if this is the way of men, can you see that it is also the way of a nation? Can you see that, if men repent not, the nation does fall into greater and greater wickedness? Believe my words, for I saw how that my father was constrained by the Holy Ghost to shut his mouth and cease to urge the Nephites unto repentance. And behold, there were no gifts of the Spirit among them and the Holy Ghost had ceased striving with them. And even my father could not write the things which he saw, for he wished not to harrow up the hearts of men by a description of the wickedness of the Nephites. Yea, I may safely say, for I was there and remember, that the Lamanites pursued the Nephites into the Land Northward to destroy them only because of the horror that the Nephites had left behind them. Yea, the Lamanites feared the Nephites and their wickedness and would rather exterminate them than risk the infection of their own people. 
16 Yea, I say unto you, The Lamanites began more righteous than the Nephites in the Great War that overcame and destroyed their enemy. But, the Law of Restoration works upon all things at once. Look and see how the Lamanites, being more righteous than the Nephites, if only in degrees, became just as wicked because of the war. Yea, observe that when the Nephite armies were all destroyed, and the more part of the survivors put to death, did the Lamanites return to their peaceful lives in the Land Southward? Yea, they did return again down to their homes, but not to peaceful lives. They turned again upon their own people ere they left and, after that the survivors returned again into the Land Southward, they so infected the people with their wickedness that there has been a continual state of war there to this day. 
17 And there is no law in the land, for every city does rule its people according to its own policies without respect of that of their neighbors. And they do trade one day with their neighbors and the next seek to take from them their goods. Yea, and yet another day, they seek to take away their lives and carry away the inhabitants of the city as slaves. 
18 Behold, we have no fear that the Lamanites might come up into the Land Northward again to assail the Nem in our day. What we fear is that their wickedness might find place in the hearts of the Nem and infect the people with the spirit of the Gadiantons. It is this against which we watch and labor. For we know that, although we live differently than they, we are but men and are subject unto the same weakness of mind and of spirit. 


CHAPTER 4 
1 Behold, in the fortieth year since the destruction of the Nephites, as I was reading in the archives of Mentina, I found in them a short history of the doings of the Jaredites. Yea, and I found it to be an abridgement of the greater records and of great use unto the convincing of the Nem to diligence in keeping the laws and statutes of God and to the holding of the course which He has set for us. And also, because the record speaks of the utter destruction of an entire people, I have caused excerpts of it to be impressed upon cylinders, in order that small books might be made after the fashion of those that were one time carried by the Nem who journeyed afar off and could not come often to read in the libraries. Now, these cylinders may be infused with ink and rolled upon kirlis or parchments and the impressions left are as if they had been written upon plates, except that the leaves of the books are not at all durable and cannot be preserved. 
2 And this was of great usefulness unto the Nem, but even more so for those few Nephites who had fled from the awful work of destruction and who have taken up their residence in Elak Kowa. For, they set aside the things that filled their hearts during the war and it must be understood that they do not wish ever to return to them, even in their private contemplation. But behold, these little books contain the record of other people and they find it more easy to contemplate the acts of the Jaredites and be reminded, than to remember their own acts. 
3 Yea, so useful was this little book unto the repentance of those Nephites who had come into the Nem after the war, that I deemed it important that they should be added unto the plates that I had left behind in the archive at Cumorah. Wherefore, I did take the record back to Cumorah and I opened the record I had added to that great library and added thereto the abridgement of the record of the Jaredites, even that which we do attribute to Ether. 
4 For my father had made the plates with sufficient space to write a greater record, for who could have known that the Nephites would utterly destroy themselves? Yea, he did add plates unto the record in order that there might be space enough to write a continuing history. And even I did add plates when I had the charge of them. Behold, this has always been the custom of they who had the charge of the records of the Nephites. And even they who had this charge, and were not righteous, still they made more plates and added them to the original. 
5 Wherefore, when my father took up the plates, he found them to be very many and he made new plates whereon he might make an abridgement of the entire record. And when he made new plates, he continued the custom passed down from our fathers, but his abridgement did not fill the plates that he had made. And I also followed in this custom, for, we did not stay in one place but were driven by the war into parts unknown and often enough into places where we knew of no ore to molten. Wherefore, it was a good custom to carry empty plates with us. 
6 But, again I say, my father thought to write a greater history than that which the Nephites left us. And, when the Lord showed him what would be the end of the Nephites, he had already made the plates. And, though he feared that it might be possible, he never quite believed that the fair race of the Nephites would sink into utter collapse and ruin. Wherefore, he filled only a portion of the plates which he had made. And, not having any clear notion of what my own future might bring while I too labored among the Nephites, I too made new plates when the occasion allowed. 
7 And now, for most of my lifetime the records of the Nephites have slept within the library of Corianton in Cumorah, and I traveled to the place where the records are kept and opened again the box in which I had placed the plates, the sword of Laban and the Urim and Thummim with its breastplate, and I took out the plates and wrote upon them the abridgement that Ether had made of the history of his people. 
8 And when I read again the last things that I had written in the record my heart swelled within me even so much that I thought it would break. And I was harrowed up again by the memories of the acts and horrible atrocities of the war and of both parties in it. 
9 And I deemed it needful and full of necessity that I add a little more unto my own record there and the Spirit did manifest also that I should do it. And I went upon the Way and saw the little flock of Gentiles which the Lord would bring into this land in the last days. And I inquired unto the Lord what things I should add unto my record, for the Spirit did manifest to me that my record would come up out of the earth unto the remnant of the children of Lehi left in the land through this little flock. And they would become a little nation among nations and begin to do a great work whereby the record of the Nephites would be spread upon all the face of the earth. 
10 And the Spirit moved upon me and showed me what I ought to add unto my own record to their benefit. And, after I had completed the work, I did seal the remaining plates up with a band, for the Nephites are no more. But now the Spirit does whisper unto me that the sealed portion may again be made useful unto the remnant and that they may be filled up in the end by such as the Lord calls again to record the doings of His people. 
11 And it was four hundred sixty and two years from the coming of the Lord unto the Nephites, and unto the Nem, that I did these things and I am satisfied that a great good shall come of the things that are recorded in my father’s book. For, I have seen the days in which they shall come forth, that the Gentiles shall rule the whole earth and shall control the hearts of the more part of the inhabitants of it. And they shall drive the people even from the shedding of blood unto the shedding of blood, just as the Nephites and the Jaredites. Wherefore, it may be that these records may be at least as useful unto the survivors of that time as they have been unto the Nephite survivors of my own city. 
12 For if in the last days there may remain any who will give up this wickedness and repent and turn away from it altogether, that even the possibility might again exist that a generation might be brought up without the memory of the fallen, then shall Zion be established again. Yea, if it so be that the Lord shall bring again Zion, it shall be among a people that have cast aside the things of the world and its unrighteousness in preparation for a generation of peace. 
13 And I have seen that the Lord shall work upon the hearts of men as He sees fit. And the Holy Ghost does continually strive with all men and women who have the capacity to set aside the world and its wickedness. And I have seen that the Lord will use the Gentiles to do a great work, and a great preparation. But they shall not bring again Zion. Nevertheless, they shall prepare the way before those that shall. 
14 Yea, even as John the Baptist could not make the atoning sacrifice, yet could he prepare the way for One who could. Yea, he did cry repentance in a wilderness of wickedness and a way was prepared for certain good souls to receive their Creator. And even in the midst of awful wickedness, He did comfort them and they were greatly enlightened and magnified. 
15 I have walked upon the Way and seen the day of wickedness. And you may believe me that the day which I have seen surpasses all the wickedness of all the ages. But behold, I have seen that the record which I did seal up in a box and place in the library of Corianton, even in Cumorah, shall be chosen of the Lord and delivered up unto a prophet in the last days. And, though that prophet shall not be found perfect in all things, yet shall the book that shall come to light through him be unto the Gentiles a guide and an anchor. And through it a generation shall be prepared to come again out of Babylon and to establish Zion again in this blessed land. 
16 And I have also seen that the Gentiles shall spread themselves upon all the face of the earth and their blood shall mingle with all the races of the earth. And when this does take place among the remnants of the house of Lehi, there shall rise out of this mingling a Remnant of the House of Israel. And I have seen that this little flock shall establish again a Heaven on Earth, even Zion in the midst of madness. 
17 Yea behold, it shall come to pass in the last days that the spirit of their dead fathers shall rise up again and speak to the matter of their bodies as a familiar spirit which does speak to them out of the dust. And some of them shall turn unto this curious prompting and they shall break with all that is deemed wisdom. And they shall go again into the wilderness, for though the earth be covered with people, so it shall be deemed. And they shall cast off the shackles of their captivity and, putting upon them a beautiful garment and adorning themselves for the wedding feast, they shall fill their lamps and wait upon the Lord. And He shall know them and welcome them in. 
18 And behold, those Gentiles who shall also go with them out of Babylon and shed the sins of the world, for they shall have taken them up fully, they shall even be grafted into the House of Israel with them. Yea, that blood in them of Isaac and of Jacob shall rise up again within them and they shall be remembered of their fathers. And they shall walk again in Zion and shall be numbered among the people. 
19 But the Gentiles who shall not be moved will continue in their wickedness even as the Nephites who could not be moved and the Jaredites who could not be moved. And it shall come to pass that they shall meet the same end. Yea, their ways shall utterly collapse and they shall wander to and fro in search of someone who might lead them again to their former greatness. But there shall be none such to be found, for they shall have lost the capacity to be moved upon by the Holy Ghost. 
20 Recall now the words of the Book of the High Place, that the Holy Ghost does not move upon the beasts or the trees, for they have no need of such movement. Behold, they fulfill the measure of their creation. But unto man it is given to move upwards. Therefore, if he retains the capacity, the Holy Ghost can move upon him. But, when man has given up that capacity and becomes as the beasts of the field, behold, the Holy Ghost shall not move upon him anymore, lest he repent. 
21 It shall come to pass that the more part of the Gentiles shall sink into this awful state. I have seen their day and I have witnessed their doing. Their history shall be one of blood and horror and, though their fathers all be the same, they shall divide themselves against each other and the slaughter shall be as never before in the history of the children of Adam. And the more part of the inhabitants of the earth shall be caught up in this wickedness and it shall be as though an enemy has despoiled the House of God and left it a wilderness. 
22 But, out of the Gentiles shall come a little flock that shall cry in this wilderness as John did. And they shall be esteemed strange among their neighbors, even as John was called a wild man. And they shall be moved upon because of that within them that shall speak as if out of their own dust. Yea, a familiar spirit shall rise up in them such that they shall be moved upon to make an experiment upon the words of the Lord. And they shall be led to the library of Corianton, even unto Cumorah, and one chosen from among them shall take up the record which I have sealed in a stone. And a little flock shall gather and they shall cry out in the wilderness and prepare the way for the establishing of Zion. 
23 And they shall carry a principle into the wilderness and a generation shall attempt to live this principle. Yea, and a generation shall learn somewhat of Zion and they shall experiment with it. But they shall not succeed except in planting the seed. 
24 And it shall come to pass that this seed shall take root in the hearts of but a few of the Gentiles and it shall be safeguarded there for a season to come. 
25 But all the rest shall be caught up in the things of the world and shall suffer. Yea, for they shall attempt to mingle the things of the world with the things of God and this mingling shall befoul all that they touch. And, ere the coming of the Lord, the getting of gain shall have become a law unto them to the extent that precious few shall be rescued. But they that are rescued, because of the memory of the fathers which shall rise up within them, shall be numbered among the Remnant of the House of Israel which shall be left in the land. 
26 And behold, I say unto you, Without this little seed, which shall be planted into the hearts of a little flock among the Gentiles, the Remnant could have no remembrance of the ways of Zion. For, they shall have been driven and trampled and made a hiss and a byword. And it shall come to pass that they shall be caught up also in the drive to become elevated in the eyes of men. And they shall have taken up the ways and customs of their captors. 
27 And it shall be because of the record which shall be delivered to them finally in the end that they shall look again within and find there the blood of their fathers crying in the wilderness. And they shall turn again unto the principles which governed the Nem in the time of their prosperity, as also the Nephites before their destruction and the Lamanites in the times after the coming of the Lord unto them. And they shall little by little, one person here and one person there, one family here and one family there, come out of Babylon and establish Zion once again in this blessed land. 
28 And, because that their blood shall have been mingled with the blood of the Gentiles, this effect shall spread somewhat out into the Gentiles to the extent that some few of them shall join with them and assist them. Behold, these shall be grafted in and it shall be unto them as if they had been born among the Remnant of the House of Israel left in the land. Yea, they shall be adopted in and, though the more part of them be Gentile, behold, the Remnant blood shall rise up and take the hold of the body until they are Israelite every bit. 
29 And when this does come to pass, they shall no more call themselves by the nation out of which their fathers arose. Rather, they shall call themselves by the Name of the Lord their Creator. For they shall have been created anew and peace shall have been written in their souls. Wherefore, they shall call their Lord the Peacemaker and they shall call themselves His disciples. 
30 And it shall come to pass that it shall be as in days of old. And, at least among the Remnant, there shall be no manner of Ites, and they shall have all things once again in common. For, among them shall all the nations of the earth be blended. Yea, among them shall be found all the blood of the creation and they shall be one people, Zion. 
31 It was for this cause that I did add somewhat unto my writings in that book which contains the abridgement of the writings and records of the Nephites. Yea, it is because the Lord showed unto me that a great work shall be commenced among the descendents of Lehi through the Gentiles that the Lord shall bring into this land in latter days, that I did return again unto the hill wherein I did hide up the record of the Nephites and add some few things that I deemed important unto their success. 
32 For, when the Great War had ended and the Nephites had utterly destroyed themselves, I had thought never to write again. And I did believe in my heart that the Lamanites would never cease the work of destruction until all who were not like unto them were destroyed from off the face of the earth. And I believed that they would take the war even unto the Nem until they too were no more. 
33 But I was wrong in this belief and, as I have already written, we see that the Lamanites did not stay long in the land of their conquest and, after the Nephites were utterly destroyed and their light extinguished, the Lamanites returned again into their own lands, and only a very few desired to remain in the land. And behold, most of those that did remain, having in just two years lost the desire for blood, became almost to a man, Nem. 
34 But the Nem continued no longer in their preparations for war, after that Heinmet went again into all the cities and instructed them all to break down their preparations for war and to dismantle their armies. And when this was done, the war was not brought unto the Nem and the Lamanites departed back down into the Land Southward. 
35 And, as a man of war, this was a curious thing to me. For I, even as my father before me, was raised up unto the Nephite people as a captain and a leader of their armies. Wherefore, I was trained in all the matters of war and the prosecution of it was part of my stewardship even from my youth. And it was a wonder to me that the Lamanites did not continue to prosecute the war upon the Nem. 
36 Behold the work of faith! When the Nem had yielded up their fear of war and returned once again to lives of peace and of faith, the war was taken away out of the land. Now, I do not say that it was done immediately. For, the Lamanites did regress into war amongst themselves almost immediately upon having destroyed the Nephites. But I say that the war was not brought unto the Nem and the Lamanites returned unto the Land Southward and there the more part of their wars amongst themselves did take place. 
37 And this is the thing that remains curious to me and is a wonder to me. And behold, it will always be a thing of faith unto me and a reminder of the great power of faith unto the salvation of peoples and of nations. And it shall always remind me also of the great love of God for all those who would follow His path and remain in the way of righteousness.
 
CHAPTER 5 
1 And the Nem did remain in the ways of the Lord. Yea, they did not depart from them and, indeed they had never departed from them, except in the forty-two years of the stewardship of Heinmet. But behold, they had not actually left the path of righteousness during that time, only that they had not all things in common. In this they had left Zion and had returned unto the ways of the world. But they did no mean or low thing, nor caused that anyone should sin, but continued to follow the precepts of righteousness. Yea, they did justify themselves in building up their armies and their cities in preparation to defend themselves against the Lamanites and the Gadiantons. And in this was no sin. But they did not preserve Zion in their hearts as their fathers did before them. 
2 And in this I see the seeds of a great wickedness. For, had they remained in it even after Heinmet had seen that he had led the people in the wrong path and made efforts to correct his error, behold, the Nem would have been no more, just as the Nephites are no more. Yea, they should have all been destroyed from off the face of this land. For, their fear of war would have overcome them, even as that fear overcame the Nephites. And it was fear of destruction that brought upon the Nephites their own lust for the destruction of the Lamanites. 
3 Behold and heed my words all you who would read these writings and ponder them in your hearts. You shall have prophets among you who will be of great use to you in deciding your paths. And when you have confirmed their words by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost, and that Holy Ghost has confirmed that the words they speak in prophecy unto you are indeed the word and will of God, and you take them up and act upon them, see that you do not then turn from them. For if you do, the Lord shall turn from you. 
4 And even if you do not turn altogether from the thing in which the Lord shall direct you, but only in some particular or another, repent quickly. For the Lord will hold you to your promises. And should you covenant with the Lord in a thing and then break from that stewardship, it would be better for you that you had died in that moment instead. For you shall surely suffer the curse that is upon this land and your suffering shall be great. 
5 And if as a people the Lord does lead you and guide you and give unto you commandments, the fulfillment of them shall bring great blessings unto you as a nation. But if you turn from that guidance and make laws unto yourselves that are contrary to the commandments that the Lord shall have given you, woe unto you! For this is what the Nephites did and their collapse and destruction was complete. 
6 Or do you suppose that the Lord will confirm you in your disobedience? He shall not! But you shall be under His condemnation as a whole people until the day in which He does lift the curse from off of this land. But behold, desire it not! For in the moment that He does lift the curse from off of this land, then shall the peculiar blessing upon this land also be removed. Behold, this blessing is great and is put upon this land in order that it might be a place wherein the Lord might nurture Zion in peace. 
7 Now I say these things unto you, as a voice speaking unto you out of the past and out of the dust, because I have seen your day and your doing. You are as the Nephites in this respect, for the Lord has shown unto you His great power and also His great love. And He shall have given unto you commandments which you shall take up with a covenant. And you shall call yourselves a covenant people and blessed above all the people of the earth and elect. 
8 But I have also seen that you shall reject the counsel of God in respect to that manner in which the People of God ought to live. And you shall altogether take back into your bosoms all the things of the world. And you shall desire again the esteem of the world over the love of God. And even you shall shrug and wink at the condemnation of God until it become a thing of naught in your minds and a thing to be discounted and ignored because of all the other things that you do for the Lord and His righteousness. 
9 Yea, I have seen how great shall be the preaching of religion among you. But behold, you cannot preach the truth if you do not live it. Yea, your preaching will have a form of godliness, but it shall deny the power thereof. 
10 And I have seen the Church, as you shall call it in your day, with its temples and synagogues that you shall build up unto the Lord. And I have seen your dedications and your oblations of money and costly things in these great buildings that you shall raise up unto Him. But can a temple built by your hands be the Lord’s house, and can you expect the Lord to abide in it when you do not His commandments? 
11 Behold, you may dedicate every rock on the face of the earth to the Lord, but if you dedicate not your own hearts it will avail you nothing. Yea, there shall be countless many who walk within the halls which you shall dedicate. But I say unto you, Only they who dedicate their hearts shall feel the presence of the Lord in such places. 
12 Behold, all this did the Nem in the days of Heinmet’s stewardship. Or do you think that they did not dedicate their earthen works of defense unto the Lord? And did you think that the great army that they built up was comprised of unworthy and unrighteous men? Do not think it. 
13 But in it the Nem pleased not God in all that they did in preparing for the war that should soon come into the Land Northward. With all their prayers and all their dedications, they built up a great and mighty idol, a thing of power that took all their efforts and occupied all their thoughts. And is this not worship? Did they not create a great golden calf to worship? Behold, I have seen your day and your great golden calf! 
14 Behold, the Nem have rescued themselves. Yea, they have left the path they chose for themselves and have returned again unto the right ways of the Lord, and they are preserved from all that they feared. Could their earthen walls and works have saved them? The Nephites had greater and yet they were driven. Could the great army raised and supported by the Nem have saved them? The Nephites had greater and yet they utterly destroyed themselves. 
15 But when the Nem tore down their towers and their battlements and abandoned those that could not be torn down and when they dismissed their men of war and their army and when they returned again unto that which the Lord had commanded them, they were preserved. Can you tear down your battlements? Can you return again unto that wherein the Lord did command you, but because of your fear of the world you left in the dust in the place of your birth? 
16 Or what shall make you any different than the Nephites or the Nem? Is it that you are so elect and so chosen that the Lord shall give you immunity to that accountability to which He has held all the rest of His children since the world was? Can you believe that the same that befell those who walked this land before shall not befall you also? 
17 And what is it that shall have so qualified you? Are you more righteous than we? Do you greater acts of charity? Do you love the Lord more than we? Do you follow His commandments with greater purpose of heart? Are these the reasons that you shall escape the curse that has been placed upon this land and enjoy the blessing only? 
18 Behold, I say unto you, Nay! I have seen your day, and even I have read the writings of your own people. I have heard the voice of God in the day that He shall condemn you as a nation if you do not repent. Behold, and this before one generation had even passed from the day in which He shall have shown Himself unto you. 
19 The Nem have enjoyed peace in this land for hundreds of years and that peace was unbroken until they departed from that which they had covenanted with the Lord. You shall have departed from your covenant even in the first generation and shall not have returned to it even until the day the Lord shall come again. 
20 As a people also you shall not have had peace, nay, not even in one generation. You shall go from the shedding of blood to the shedding of blood until it shall become a way of life unto you. Yea, I have seen a day among your people and among your nation, in the day that the Lord shall bring this record into the light, when all your citizens shall celebrate your wars even when you shall have escaped destruction by them. 
21 And I have seen you raise up your symbols and make oblations and praise yourselves because of your successes in war, and your heroes shall all be warriors. And I have even seen how you play at war and teach your children to exercise themselves in it so that when they are older they shall be the more easily trained to put aside all goodness. Yea, your warriors shall not be taught to pray for deliverance from battle, but they shall only pray for victory and praise themselves for their might. 
22 And shall your leaders and your prophets stand upon the battlements and upon the walls decrying these things? Shall your great men warn against them? They shall not, but they shall comfort themselves and speak of the good purposes which the governors have for their wars and for their constant contention with the nations. And they stand up before the people and teach war. They shall extol the virtues of those few who are able to feel of the spirit even after they have engaged in the horrible work of destruction. 
23 I do not say that such a thing is evil, for to feel the spirit at all must be a good thing. But is this enough? I say unto you, It is not. For so taught also my father, and so also did I in the midst of the Great War, and yet the Nephites were utterly destroyed. 
24 And what is it that destroyed them? It is that they were engulfed in that awful darkness in which men and women must sink in order that they might lift up the sword in wrath to destroy another human being. And it is a peculiar teaching that takes a young and tender youth from his mother’s bosom and from his father’s knee and makes of him a monstrous thing. I know whereof I speak, for it was my business to do such things. And even I cannot escape the memory of it today – how that I took the young men among the Nephites and made them an army of warriors. This memory continues to harrow up my soul, and though I spend the rest of my life atoning for my part in the destruction of the Nephites, I think I shall still feel the anguish of it all the days of my life. 
25 Wherefore I ask you, ought not every prophet spend a lifetime in decrying this awful wickedness? Should there ever be found a true prophet who can condone the work of destruction and remain a prophet? This, I think, is a thing impossible to ask. 
26 I know that I shall be called a prophet in the latter days, but I say unto you, How could the Nephites see me as prophet and commander all at once? How could I speak words of peace in their ears and then lead them into the work of destruction? Nay, the commander in war is never a prophet unto his people, for, one cannot say in one breath, Love Thy Neighbor, and then put him to death by the sword. 
27 Now, there have been great men and women whom the Lord has called out particularly to take the life of man. Nephi of old was one, as was also Hagmeni and his sons. Behold, for the sake of a nation, they did take life. But this is not the horrible work of destruction, even war. For war takes not only the life of the individual wicked man or woman, it robs a generation of peace. It does not simply root out a singular wickedness, but creates a general desire to do wickedness both night and day and out of necessity justifies itself. 
28 And it is because of this that the Lord speaks peace unto the soul. He speaks peaceable things of love, gentleness and charity. He stirs no man up to open and wicked war. He justifies no man in it. Nay, this is not the way of the Lord. It was not the Lord who called the Nephites up unto battle against the Lamanites. Behold, my father knew and so did I, that had the Nephites left the field of battle, so too would the Lamanites. For the battle had become so sore that both armies would have left it many times and returned unto their own country. 
29 But the Nephites would not. They burned in their hearts against the Lamanites . And so too did the Lamanites burn in their hearts against the Nephites to destroy them. In the beginning, they sought only to defend themselves against the Lamanites and the Gadiantons who led them. But they were very soon so carried away with the desire to avenge themselves upon their enemies that thoughts of defense no longer entered their minds. Or did you think that it was defense of their homes that drove them across the Land of Desolation in pursuit of the Lamanites? And was it in defense of the Nem and their lands that caused them to prosecute the war into the Land Northward even thousands of miles from their own homes? I say unto you, Nay. It was their lust to destroy their enemy utterly that drove them, and in the end, brought upon their destruction completely. 
30 Do you seek after peace? Do not think that I, who have seen your day and your doing, have not also seen those few who shall seek to come out of Babylon and touch not her uncleanness. Yea, I have seen even that little flock that shall bring again Zion in this land. But how shall they do it? What example shall they use? Shall it be the Gentiles and their ways? Or do you suppose that the Jews might have some counsel for them? Where shall they turn to learn what they must know in order to live in peace upon this land and enjoy the blessing of it instead of enduring the curse laid upon it? 
31 Behold, shall they look up to their shepherds in that day - they who have all been warriors and who come of warrior stock and creed - they whose notions about freedom shall overturn their understanding of the commandments of God - they who shall justify even wars prosecuted in far away places whose people had not even seen their own fair homes or known their people? Shall they teach the laying down of the unclean thing? Shall they teach any man or woman anything about that Zion which must be built up in the heart before it may be established in the earth? 
32 I say unto you, Nay. But, they shall surely look to their fathers to find an ensample to follow. Yea, their hearts shall indeed turn unto the fathers, and the hearts of the fathers shall turn again unto the children. And the whole earth shall not be wasted at the coming of the Creator. I say unto you, Men and women shall once again walk upon the Way, and because of this, the records of the fathers shall come again into the light and be had for an ensample unto them. Then shall they take of the things they read of the ways and customs and covenants of their fathers and, seeing distantly as if through a fog, they shall again begin to live in peace. 
33 Yea, they shall have all things in common even in a time when all else is in turmoil. And when all other peoples are at conflict one with another, they shall have peace and shall sustain and support each other. They shall find ways to serve one another and assist each other in coming out of the world. And they shall spread their way of life to other people and assist them also. Great shall be the work of a tiny flock of the children of Lehi in the last days. 
34 For behold, were it not so, the world would of a surety come to naught and shall have been wasted at the coming of the Lord. And how shall you feel, oh son of man, at the end of all things, to have as your report to the Creator of Heaven and Earth that the world was not good enough for peace and the hearts of men were not pure enough for goodness? How shall you feel, you mothers, to have as your report unto the Creator of Heaven and Earth that the daughters of Eve could not find love enough in their hearts to preserve the Earth and they had not gratitude enough to give thanks for the good things of the Earth? And how shall the Earth respond when she must report to her Creator that all things are wasted and that it should have been better never to have been made at all? 
35 I say unto you, All you who shall seek peace in the day of which I speak, beat your swords into plows and your spears into hooks. Put forth your hand to heal the Earth and take good care of her. Lay your hands upon no man or woman to do them injury, but lay your hand to the plow and the sickle to cultivate the good earth and to partake of her generous harvest. 
36 Send not your sons to any war for any reason. Let not your leaders convince you that any cause for war is righteousness, unless the Lord does command it, but lay yourselves down before the blows of your enemies if need be. Yea, in fine, do all that you see that the Ammonites did. Make peace. Live with peace in your hearts. Love your fellowman and do not use him, but provide a surplus in all that you seek to do, that the beggar might not put up his petition in vain. 
37 Yea, in fine, unless the Lord shall command it, make no war at all. Be no part of, but rather shun the work of destruction. For, I say unto you, Unless He does command it, He shall not justify it. And, if He justify it not, it is an abomination of desolation, even like as has been spoken of by the prophets. 
CHAPTER 6 
1 Now, I write these things unto you for what I deem to be a good purpose. For, I could have laid down my stylus and made no more mark upon plates of metal than those which I have already made and hidden up in the earth. Yea, I could have been done with all that the Lord had commanded me to write concerning my stewardship among the Nephites. 
2 But behold, He has not seen fit to let me remain idle now that my days are lengthened, but He has wrought upon me powerfully by the Holy Ghost. And I deem it of some importance that I write these more personal words unto you who will surely read these things in the day that the Lord does bring them out of obscurity. For behold, as I have said before, I have seen your day. Yea, I have observed your doing. And it is a good purpose in the Lord that you should receive the writings of one who has spent the more part of his life in the midst of war and of bloodshed. 
3 Yea, I do see your day, that in it there shall be wars and rumors of war. And your young men and even your young women shall for the sake of peace and safety run headlong into destruction. Yea, they shall cry Peace and Safety as they charge their perceived enemy with horrible death. And in this they shall but repeat that which they shall have heard spoken from the pulpit of the synagogues. Yea, at the feet of their prophets shall they hear the preaching of war and the justifying of death and destruction. And all the people shall pray for their deliverance and the death of all who might oppose them. And this unthinking prayer shall fall from the lips of even the shepherds, and this shall be their teaching. 
4 Yea, they shall cry Peace and Safety, Peace and Safety, then speedily shall destruction come. For, their young men and even their women shall speed to the fore of the battle with these words on their lips. And destruction shall be all their desire and all their prayer. 
5 And their fathers shall likewise pray for the destruction of all who might oppose them. And their mothers shall also pray for their deliverance and for the destruction of their adversaries in battle. Yea, and their tender brothers and sisters shall be taught also to pray for their success and that they might be preserved. But they shall not know that in this prayer they but beg their God to deliver the enemy up to destruction. 
6 And their pastors and their teachers shall justify this prayer and this oblation unto death and darkness. And they shall stand them up on pulpits and on raised platforms and they shall preach all that is required to justify the death of men and of women, of boys and of girls, all for the sake of peace and of safety. 
7 And they shall not see the folly in praying for the peace that is bought with blood and with terror. Yea, the whole earth shall stink with it, and the field shall be darkened with it. The song and voice of a generation shall be swallowed up in it and the sight of the seer shall be darkened by it. Yet, shall they pray for the success of their own in it. Yea, they shall pray to God in Heaven for the death of their enemy and shall call this a prayer for peace. 
8 For behold, peace shall have but one significance to them, that all men shall see things their way. And for this shall they take up weapons of war and they shall destroy fathers and mothers, brothers and sisters and call themselves the very elect of God. And they shall surely justify themselves, for did they not hear even the same from the Lord’s Anointed? 
9 But I say unto you, All you who would take up Zion again and plant her in your hearts – if you would be the messengers of peace, do not deliver your message with the sword. If you would raise up an ensign of peace unto your adversary in the field, let it not be with the war cry that you deliver it. If you would be a light unto the world and put your lamp upon the bushel before the household, have a care that it not burn down the house and the city. Yea, let it not be in the name of the Lord that you strike off the head and part the body of he whom someone has called your enemy. 
10 For none shall bring again Zion by the work of destruction, even war. Let none deceive you. There is no cause that shall justify the taking of the life of man or woman, save it be by the word and will of God alone. And you may believe it; He shall not use any lofty words to puff you up should it be His will that you take the life of any person. 
11 Nay, you shall hear the command and the Holy Ghost shall confirm it, and that is all. Nay, do not expect men to stand and extol you or your calling. Do not expect prophets to cry over your worthiness. Do not even expect to feel justified in it yourself, nay, not in any way. And if it be so hard a thing to take the life of man when the Creator of Heaven and of Earth shall require it at your hands, do not allow mere men to puff you up in the work of destruction to but fulfill their earthly purposes. 
12 For, show me the man who has received of Heaven the vision of eternity – yea, who has even the vision of all things before him - who does then cast all such knowledge aside that he might throw young men and women into battle for the sake of earthly things. Nay, you cannot. For, such a man cannot exist. But the God of Heaven and Earth does have all things before Him, yet He commands no man to battle except in preservation of His chosen people. 
13 What then? Shall you call yourselves His chosen people? Do you live His commandments? Do you keep His law? Is it to preserve this that you cast your young men into battle in far away places among people who knew nothing of your way of life? Do you call yourselves the People of God and walk in His paths that you may so justify bringing unto them from so far away the work of death and destruction? 
14 And because you claim to be the elect of God, do you suppose that He will justify you? Behold, the Lord is bound when we keep His commandments. Yea, He is bound by that same law wherewith He does command us. If we observe to do all that He does command us, there is no changeability in Him. But, if we turn from His ways and from His commandments, behold, He shall also turn away His face from us. We have no promise at all and may not expect anything from Him if we do not keep His commandments. 
15 Now, did He command us to hate our enemy? Or did He warn us to render equity to them that despitefully use us? And if it so be that our neighbor becomes our enemy, did He admonish us to go to and dig a pit for him? Or did He teach that when the stranger comes into our midst that we should strip him and beat him and cast him out? And has He ever taught that we ought to carefully judge our neighbor and render unto him according to our own ways and our own customs? 
16 Yet, these are the things that you shall do even unto all your neighbors, small or great. Yea, this is the vision of your day which the Spirit has shown me. Behold, I say unto you, There shall be some few who feel the promptings of the Spirit in the day in which these things shall be delivered up unto men to judge. And I speak unto you as if you were here even before me. If you be among they who shall think to bring again Zion in such a land and among such a people, let no man, be he prophet or king, convince you to go up to war. Do not think that you can speak peace with the sword. Do not think that you may take up the seed of Zion to plant it in your hearts, with the sword in your hand still steaming from the fray. 
17 Wherefore, all you Sons of God, go not unto any war nor up unto any battle unless it is God’s war and God’s battle, and be careful what you lay at His feet. For, the prize of victory has ever been the bodies of the enemy. Shall not the heads and arms and legs, the swords and the shafts, the horses and the chariots that you lay at the feet of your Sovereign be any different than the heads you shall bow and the arms you shall raise up unto Him, or the knees that you shall bend? And what difference is there between your swords and theirs? If it be man’s conflict, flee from before the face of it. Make no war upon anyone, for perchance you prevail, shall the God of Heaven rejoice in your spoils? And what shall you add to His storehouse but death? 
18 Now, these are words rising out of the dust. Yea, it is as a familiar spirit that I speak unto you. My words are the words of one who has raised the sword against his neighbor. Yea, I have brought down the sword and I have relieved many men and women of their limbs and their lives, and can I call myself justified in the work of destruction? I cannot! 
19 Behold, the war between the Nephites, my people, and the Lamanites was a war of men and not of God. My father was a prophet and a man of God. Yet, he commanded the Nephites in an iniquitous war. And there was no justification for any of them in it, for God was not in it. The work of death had no purpose but death. And even I commanded the Nephites in the latter part of the war. And there was not one of them who raised up their sword because God had commanded them. They did so only to reap a vengeance upon their enemy. 
20 Behold, were the elect of God preserved? Did it profit any man to be a Nephite in the end? Are there any of the Fair Ones left in the land who call themselves Nephite? And did not they who are called accursed prevail against us? Yea, for the Nephites are a race that exists no more at all. And though they raised up their voices in mighty prayer unto God for their deliverance, did He, hearing their prayers, preserve them? He did not. 
21 I ask you, were the Lamanites righteous? Of a surety they were more righteous than the Nephites. But, were they righteous? Did they live the laws and statutes and commandments of God? They did not! Yet they prevailed. And this is the thing that I should like you to consider, all you who would call yourselves elect. Yea, consider these things all you who would bring again Zion in this land. The Lamanites were wicked, yet they prevailed against the Nephites. The prayers of the Nephites were as sounding brass. 
22 It is not to be judged who is elect and who is not. The wars of men never have for their purpose to bring about righteousness, any more than the war between the Nephites and the Lamanites had for its purpose to establish righteousness in the land. Nay! The Nephites desired only the death of the Lamanites and the Lamanites desired only the death of the Nephites. If you take war into a foreign land and to a foreign people in order to establish peace in your own land, you shall harvest the hurricane. You cannot sow peace with death. You cannot get safety by killing your neighbor. 
23 Let this be a tradition and a custom unto you, as it has become a custom among the Nem - that you go not up to battle until the Lord shall be your commander. For, in the day that you raise up some man to command you, you have raised up a golden calf. And in the day that you rely upon the arm of the flesh to establish peace in the land, in that day you shall have planted in the hearts of men an abomination that shall make the nation desolate. Yea, the nation shall become as a barren woman who sits upon the ground. For, the Lord shall not hear the prayers of that nation, and is this not desolation? 


CHAPTER 7 
1 Now, when I had established my own settlement, those who joined with me in it undertook to bring timber down out of the mountains on the East side of the Valley of Mentina. And we sawed the timber and made posts and beams, boards and planks the likes of which the Nem of Mentina were wont to use in the building of houses and other structures, as also for furniture and certain useful tools. 
2 And we discovered that the trees of the valley were not fast growing and it became important to carefully replant the trees as we cut them, lest the mountains become a waste place. For, we had seen the same take place across the desert where Father Hagoth made his first settlement. 
3 For, in the days of Heinmet’s stewardship, the people there had taken all the trees in their preparations for war. And they used them up in all their preparations so that the hills and the mountains were denuded completely. And this proved to be a great folly for them, for without the trees to hold the moisture and the rains, and also to stabilize the earth, the waters ran quickly over it. And when the snows melted in the spring, the waters ran quickly into the gullies and the valleys and stayed not at all in the soil. And because of this folly, the earth did not yield up the fruits of the harvest, but became dry and burnt and the corn died but halfway to harvest. And all this because the people, in their haste to protect and defend themselves, had not taken the time to consider the needs of the land. 
4 And there are people in that place today, but never so many as was supported in times past because of the destruction of the forests. And in the place of many settlements and villages, as was once the state of that part of the country, there remains only one small village today. Where once there were thousands of Nem in that place, yea, tens of thousands, now there are only but a few hundred and they require assistance every year from the other cities. And all this did take place in the space of but one generation and many cities and villages which had been the home of many families of the Nem for generations were become desolate and empty. 
5 And we did not wish this to happen in our own valley. Wherefore, we took great care to replant three trees for every one that we cut down. And in this manner we did continue to build up the forests of Mentina. And all the people who cut trees did begin to emulate our practice. 
6 And the waters that came down out of the mountains each spring did continue well into the summer. And we had much water for our crops and our livestock. And behold, the shallow lake that filled the southern end of the valley continued to produce fish for meal and birds of all kinds for the table. 
7 And above the lake the Nem worked the ground and planted grain of all kinds. And also they did move livestock up into the hills on the west side for there was much grass there. And they ran stock in the hills from which the people made all manner of clothing from the wool and the hair, and also of which they had meat and meal. 
8 And also, when one crossed through the mountains which protected the Valley of Mentina on the west, there were yet other valleys. And in one just west and north of Mentina, there was a great lake around which the Nem did build many villages. Yea, the lake gathered many waters from the mountains far in the east and many villages were built up upon its shores. 
9 And this lake was deep and full of fish of larger size than those which inhabited the lake at Mentina. And these fish provided much food for the people. And they also planted fruit and grain of every kind along the shores of the lake, and there was much game. 
10 But west of the lake there are mountains that are filled with many kinds of ores. Yea, there one may find iron and copper, beryl and gold in some quantity. And these the people smelted into all manner of useful tools. And also they found and quarried stone of great beauty that proved very useful in industry and in the making of tools and of ornament. 
11 And again further north there was a lake of salt water like unto the sea. And this place was largely barren except in the places where fresh water did run into it. And the people did not build many settlements there, except in those places where the salt was dried and harvested. And in these places were a few settlements built up to accommodate those who made their living drying salt for trade with other cities and settlements of the Nem. 
12 Now, certain of the Nem saw that the Great War between the Nephites and the Lamanites had brought much destruction upon those parts of the Land Northward into which it had moved. But, when the Nephites had all been destroyed and the Lamanites could not support themselves after their wants, they left many horses and beasts of burden upon the land. And many of the Nem took up these horses and beasts and brought them into their own lands and husbanded them. 
13 And these beasts became popular for transport, both the cattle and the horses, but most especially the horses. For, upon the plains, it could be difficult to follow the great herds on foot. But with horses as swift as the herds, and requiring no special provender, they were able to greatly improve their manner of living. 
14 And the people of Nespelem became great in the breeding and management of these horses and they did produce them in great numbers. And behold, so proficient did they become in their management, that they did bring into breeding the production of such variations in color, in size and in form that they did greatly improve them. 
15 Now, among their horses there was a kind that pleased me very much. Yea, and it also pleased several of the men with whom I had established my settlement. And this kind of horse had a body all of one dark color such as black or brown but the hindmost parts were white as with a blanket. And some were almost white as with a blanket full of holes. Such was the spotting of this variety of horse and we were desirous to obtain them. 
16 For, they are beautiful and also easy to see. And this seemed to us a good thing here in the mountains, for they would be less easy to lose in the forests with these patterns. But this is not all. The people of Nespelem had bred these horses to be hard in the hoof such that they needed much less attention to keep them sound. And they were also shorter in the body than the horses found in Mentina and this seemed to us a better build for use in the mountains. 
17 Wherefore, I took a group of young men and boys, those who could be spared from the work of our mills, and went with them even up unto the people of Nespelem. And we took lumber as is used in the building of furniture and useful tools with us to trade for horses. 
18 And the people of Nespelem would not take our lumber, for they had much timber of their own and had no need of ours. But they did insist that we take horses with us even down into Mentina, for they were pleased that the kind of horses they had developed for their hilly and mountainous terrain might also have usefulness in the mountains and hills of Mentina. And also they were wont that the line be diversified and become not too close. And it seemed to them that some good stock from among the horses of Mentina might be introduced into the line without ruining it, and in this way, the line might be strengthened. 
19 And we were desirous to join with them in the breeding of these colorful horses, for there were none like them anywhere else in all the land. Wherefore, because we liked them so much and were desirous to engage with them in their further development and preservation, the Nem of Nespelem did insist that we take of all that we desired down into Mentina with us. 


CHAPTER 8 
1 Now, one of the young men who accompanied me up into Nespelem was my son Shioni. And he found favor with the granddaughter of Henmiet and Panith-Akek. And Panith-Akek was yet living and called him in to take council with him, and they did speak together for many hours. And when Shioni came from council with Panith-Akek, he treated with the father of the girl and asked for her hand in marriage. 
2 Now, this Panith-Akek was the same who traveled into the north with her husband, Henmiet, to begin a new settlement. And it was this same Panith-Akek who was the daughter of Phenith-Pel who had come up from the city of Hez in the Land Southward and who had married Sabel-Nah, the daughter of Hamit, the high priest of the city of Tarramarhah. 
3 And behold, Tarramarhah was utterly destroyed and the land round about it was laid waste in the Great War between the Nephites and the Lamanites. And all the people fled out of the land and made their homes in other cities. And all those who stayed were destroyed or enslaved by the Lamanites. 
4 Wherefore, the granddaughter of Panith-Akek was among the last of a generous line of Nem and she was highly esteemed by her grandmother. For, Panith-Akek had looked upon the Way and seen the history of her granddaughter and her descendants. And in the vision she beheld that much restoration would come unto the people in latter days because of the seed of her granddaughter. And she saw in her vision that there would spring out of her womb a restoration of many things lost to the people. 
5 And it is because of this that Shioni took to himself the name of his wife and became, Shioni Akek from that day. And he made a pledge and a covenant with the aged Panith-Akek that all his children would also carry her name, and all their children also, so that her name might not dwindle and become lost. 
6 Now, the people of Nespelem adhered strictly to the customs of the Ammonites as described by Shi-Tugo and, because of this and the necessity to take part in the many ceremonies required by the ways and customs of the people of Nespelem, we were constrained to prevail upon their hospitality for a season. For my son would not leave without that he and Paniet-Akek should be made husband and wife. 
7 And we had arrived in the Valley of Nespelem late in the season and the snows were approaching. Wherefore, we did remain in Nespelem all winter and only undertook to make our return unto Elak Kowa after the river was free of ice. 
8 And certain of our young men took this example that my son set for them and they also sought the hand of the daughters of Nespelem to wife. For while we were there, some few of the young men of Elak Kowa found favor in the eyes of the mothers of Nespelem and also of their daughters. And they were given as husbands to several. Wherefore, when the time came to return again down into Mentina, it was not with horses only that we returned. And in this way was the bond between our two cities made the stronger. 
9 But while we yet sojourned with the family of Panith-Akek, I took it upon myself to instruct them in the making of strong metal and of implements and tools. This is a thing which my father had taught me and, seeing that the art was not had among the people there, I did teach them. 
10 But behold, it is a curious thing that took place in Nespelem. For, though the people were pleased with the things that I taught them, none of them took the art up as their stewardship, preferring to be husbandmen instead. And this is a thing I have observed often among the Nem of the Mountains. The people of a region become set and accustomed in the things that their fathers undertook and do hardly make a change in their stewardships from one generation to another. So it was in Nespelem. The young men preferred to be husbandmen of horses and of cattle, and to attend to all things pertaining to that stewardship over anything new that might come to them from another place. 
11 But they did all honor me and my company in all the long months that we remained with them. For, when the snows come in Nespelem there is no traveling from one place to another. And this is because that the snow mounts up rapidly unto a very great depth and it becomes difficult for the horses to travel. Wherefore, the people of Nespelem do not travel in the winter months, but remain for the most part indoors. 
12 And it is in these months of the year that the elders recite the stories of the Heroes of the people. They tell the tale of Hagoth and his journey up the Akish. And also of the Twins who took of the miracle of the great fish and made the people well with the contents of its belly. And also they recite the tales of Elak Kowa and the Gadiantons. And they also tell the stories of the prophets who were called away down to preach against the wicked cities of the Land Southward. 
13 But the stories that were enjoyed the most by the children were those of the visit of the Great Healer, even that Jesus Christ, to the Nem. And the story tellers never embellished, but read directly from the scriptures about His visit and recited directly His teachings. 
14 And it was when the children and the elders sat down to do work of all kinds inside the lodge that the elders did commence to tell the Hero stories. And all the people listened as they went about their labors. And behold, this did shorten the day and cause it to pass meaningfully and with joy. And also in this way did the elders reestablish the importance of the Good Word in the hearts of the young people and the children. 
15 Now, when the snow had ceased and the river began to lose its covering of ice, we did make ready our plans to depart again out of the Valley of Nespelem and take our journey down into Meninta. And there had been many marriages while we were sojourning with the people of Nespelem and many families were added upon. And we were laden with the gifts given to the young couples, so much so that we had no room for the provisions given to them and were constrained to leave behind all the lumber we had taken with us. 
16 And this did please us greatly. For we had carried the lumber up into Nespelem with the idea of trading for horses, but the people would not take of our lumber in trade, preferring to give us the horses simply because we had a need of them and desired them greatly. Such was the way of the people of Nespelem. 
17 But they were constrained, because of the marriages, to take our lumber as a gift in return, for we had not room in the wagons to take it back with us. And we were well pleased that we could make of the work of our hands a gift unto so generous a people. 
18 And we did, at last, undertake to make our journey back to our home. For we desired to return again to our own stewardships and rely no more upon the generosity of our neighbors. And I did desire greatly to return to my own house and my own hearth. 
19 And when we arrived again at Elak Kowa, the families came out and met us and how great was their joy to find such additions to the settlement. For the daughters of Nespelem were strong and fair, and they were eager to meet their new relations. Yea, they brought great joy to the Mothers of our settlement. 
20 And the men of the settlement came out altogether and they built lodges for the new couples, and each one had their own house that summer. And the women did take the new Mothers in and make them very welcome. And they did meet in Council and all the new Mothers were taken in by them. 
21 Behold, this is the way of the Nem. There is no strife over place or position. And who were these young women to stand in the same stature as the Mothers of the community? Who were they to come from a foreign town and take up places of importance among their mothers-in-law? Behold, there was not one word of dissent or discord, because that each of them were now Mothers of the community. And this is according to an old and very worthy custom. 
22 And it is well that they observe to keep this custom, for, if there were strife and discord, the life of the community would be all confusion. Behold, it is the Mothers who teach the young children and form their characters. And they do nurture them in every good thing. But, if the little children learned strife from their mothers from a very young age, there could be no thought of peace when they grow older. But every man and every woman would follow their own law and their own customs and would be in contention and competition one with another. Behold, I would ask you, could there be peace in any such community? 
23 Therefore, you who are mothers, see that you do as the Mothers of the Nem do. Teach peace in every example to your little ones. For, though they be little in stature, yet are they intelligent. Yea, they are endowed with intelligence that you know not, nor is it easy to perceive. But they do learn and take on the attributes of their mothers. 
24 And you husbands, how can your children help but belittle the place of Mother in the community if you do it in their sight? The Mother is the most important person in the village. It is to teach this truth that Shi-Tugo and Hemen taught the principle of the Mother’s Council. Yea, it is for this cause - to teach the little children the importance of peace in the village - that the Mother’s Council is the governing council of the people. Then, if this be so, and you slight the Mother in your own home and make of her station something less than holiness and righteousness, yea, if you make of her a slave and a servant, dependent and weak, how shall your children grow in truth and in power? 
25 I say unto you, They shall not, but the Mother in your home shall become despised. And, learning to despise she who gave them life, shall your children learn to love anything worthy? I say unto you, Nay. They shall be despisers of every good thing because that the first good thing in their lives was despised in their sight. And shall they love the Lord their God and despise their own mothers? 
26 And, if the young girls are raised up in the belief and the knowledge of their importance to the community, shall they then take on evil attributes? Shall they make themselves despised by the people? I say unto you, Nay. They shall be filled with every virtue, for there shall be no doubt of their worth and of their abilities. 
27 And, if young men have been raised up in this same belief, shall they become strikers and abusers of women and children? Again I say unto you, Nay. It shall not be so. For, shall a man strike and abuse that which is of the most value to him and to his fellows? Not at all. 
28 Behold, I have lived within the company of men whose only business was the work of destruction and of war. And, because the women were not of the same physical stature as they and because they were unable to work that profession to the same degree of ferociousness as the men, they esteemed them to be of lesser value than they. Yea, and they esteemed their women as workers only and worthy only of that distinction given to them because they provided services to them. 
29 And the men grew coarse with the women and with the children. For their desire was unto their possessions and unto their great pride. Wherefore, the value of women was not built upon their worth in the village, but as their worth in providing for the men and their needs. In this way, the women became mere chattels, as also the children. 
30 Behold, the little children were not blind nor unintelligent. They saw the manner in which their mothers were treated by those who were esteemed great. And they emulated their fathers, both sons and daughters, and they esteemed their mothers to be mere possessions while serviceable and burdens in their age and infirmity. 
31 And the young men became strikers and abusers of women and of children. And the family was esteemed like unto their stock or their weapons – as things and substance that either enriched or impoverished. 
32 And in this way did the Nephites and the Lamanites both lose that which was most desirous in life. Yea, and in the end they lost even the desire to live, but went from the shedding of blood to the shedding of blood. Behold, at the end of the day they went down into sleep wishing and praying that the following day’s battle might bring them down into death and end their suffering. 
33 And the hearts of men failed them to the hurt of all they loved. Yea, and they even lost the ability to love at all to the extent that when men took women to wife, they did love and make a lie. Behold, this is a thing most evil in the sight of the Lord. 
34 Wherefore, I would exhort you who would receive these, my writings, if it be wisdom in God that you should receive them, that you ought to ponder them in your heart. And if it be wisdom in God that you should receive my words, then let them have effect in you in such a manner as to restore in you the love of life if you have lost it. And if you are not sunken down in despair, let my words also have effect in you in such a manner as to preserve in you the love of life. 
35 For lust is no preserver, neither restorative. It destroys the heart of man, that it fail him. It wrecks the love of women, that they fail the children. It mutes the love of children, that they learn not virtue. 


CHAPTER 9 
1 Now, Paniet-Akek had also the gift of her grandmother, Panith-Akek, in that she walked upon the Way with ease and received much revelation there. And she was a great prophet and was of great worth to her people. Wherefore, that Shioni gained favor in her sight was a great honor to him and to his people. And that he gained favor in the sight of her grandmother was also deemed a great honor by the people of Elak Kowa. And our family was joined with a family greatly blessed with the gifts of the Spirit by the union of our children. 
2 And the gifts of Panith-Akek and of Paniet-Akek are greatly to be desired, for they are the ability to walk and talk daily with the Grandfathers, with angels, with the spirits of just men and women made perfect, and with the Christ Himself when need be. 
3 Yea, so great is this gift that all the Nem aspire to possess it and they work diligently to acquire it. For behold, it is a gift that does come naturally to those upon whom the Lord sees fit to bestow it, and this is usually when He has some special purpose for that person. But it is also among the gifts of the Spirit unto which we may aspire. And the Lord does make it available to all who would have it, but it comes only by much diligent labor. 
4 And this is the manner in which the Nem do teach their children to labor to attain this great gift: 
5 From the earliest age, yea, even as soon as the child is able to comprehend the words of its mother, every child is taught the teachings and principles of the High Place. In this manner, the child comes to an early understanding of the realities of the Universe in which we live. For it would not do for the child to have any misconceptions of the nature of the Universe and of creation. Such things do become great impediments for those wishing to walk upon the Way. 
6 For, the Way is a construct of the creation. And it is made up of the matter which the Creator took back to Himself when the first of our race left the protected place which was their first home. Yea, when First Woman, who is represented by Mother Eve, first decided to leave the place of protection and when First Man, who is represented by Father Adam, decided to remain with her, and so all of the people followed them also, the Creator took up again all that which made up the First Home, which is represented by the Valley and Garden of Eden, and with that matter He made the Way. 
7 Now, the Way is not to be understood to be part of the Spirit World wherein we lived before the World was made. For that is a different creation and has no part of the type and kind of matter out of which the World was made. But the Way is made from matter that makes up part of the World in which we live, but having been protected by the Lord, it remains under His influence. Wherefore, it is said to be part of the Terrestrial World wherein there is no death. 
8 And the Creator so constructed the Way that it makes access unto all other places in the World, even all the kingdoms therein. And a person who attains to this gift gains access to all places and kingdoms whereunto the Lord sees fit to give guidance. 
9 Wherefore, it is better that little children be taught the truth of Creation, that when they seek entrance upon the Way, they might not be encumbered with misconceptions which might prove a stumbling block to them. 
10 And the child is taught to completely set aside the things and thoughts and intentions of the world. Yea, only when a person is able to set aside, even for a moment, the things of the world can access to this place and to this gift be attained. And the Nem train their children in the art of setting all things aside in order that their minds and hearts might be clear of them, that their minds might be single to the purposes of the Lord. 
11 And it is a characteristic of those who find it easier than others to gain this gift that they are also the more able to set aside the world and all unclean and unholy thoughts than most. Yea, these are they who also find it the easier to follow the path of the Lord in their daily walk and talk of life. For, it is very true, that to walk upon the Way is the beginning of the Calling and Election of the Lord and a more sure word of prophecy. Wherefore, to set aside the world and its distractions is the first step in attaining to the great gift, even to seek and find the Christ and speak with Him face to face. 
12 And this is the very cause that mention of it is made in the Book of the High Place and that this principle finds reference in the ordinances of the Temple. Yea, Adam and Eve are introduced into the Terrestrial World and there they are taught further light, truth and knowledge pertaining to the kingdom and the power and the glory of God. And this thing is sealed unto them by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost, by which gift and power the man and the woman might know the truth of all things. 
13 Now, I ask you, who is Adam and who is Eve, when we go up unto the Holy House to be instructed in all things Holy? And when they stand at the veil of heaven, do they stand alone in their own merits? I say unto you, Nay. But behold, the Peacemaker stands next to them and assists them in all that they must learn and do in order that the veil might be rent from top to bottom and from bottom to top, and be undone in them. 
14 And the children are taught to diligently study the principles of the High Place and also to seek an introduction into the Terrestrial World at an early age. 
15 And for many, this training includes the manner of setting aside all physical distraction for a space of time. And for some this means the sensation and distraction of the body and they are taught to put such things aside. And they are taught the manner of meditation and prayer that does assist them in this endeavor. 
16 For, it is very true, that for some the distraction of their actions, as also the actions of others, is that which constitutes their greatest obstacle. And for others, their words, as also the words of others, are that which are the most distracting. And still for others, the needs of the body and the sensations of the members are that which are the things that do prevent them. All these things present obstacles to the mind and the spirit and the children are taught through diligent exercise to set them aside. 
17 For the mind and the heart must be free of such things and filled only with good and righteous intention. Until such a state can be achieved, the Way will be an obstacle to the progress of the individual. For it is upon the Way that the man or the woman does make the mighty change of heart. Yea, it is upon the Way that a new creation is made within the man or the woman. And this new creation is able to stand in the presence of Heavenly and Holy Beings. But behold, without this change the man or the woman must remain as they are. 
18 Behold, this is the purpose of the Way, which is revelation. Recall that no unclean thing may stand in the presence of God. This same principle applies to all Heavenly or Resurrected Beings. But, as telestial creatures, we are all unclean and unable to stand in the presence of God, for should we attempt it, we are destroyed. 
19 And this is not because that God does not love us, or that He is a respecter of persons. Nay, it is because that the light and truth which does pervade the very body of the resurrected and perfected being is greater than that which fills us and gives us life by such a degree that mere proximity to it disrupts that power which holds all bonds together in the telestial bodies. Yea, and when it is within the pleasure and purpose of God to visit telestial man or woman, He must provide a way whereby such a one might receive Him without the disruption of the telestial body. 
20 But behold, the principles and the ordinances of the High Place have for their purpose to change the mind and the heart of men and women such that they are able to be filled with good intention. And when this is accomplished in them, a change is also made in their physical being. This is what is meant by the mighty change of heart. For, they are made new creations. 
21 And does a man enter again into his mother’s womb, and is he born again? Nay, but he is made and created anew and comes forth a new being. And, though his body is still telestial and will remain such until he has completed his task in mortality, yet shall he stand in the presence of the celestial because of that great gift given only by the Son and attained only through the Holy Ghost upon the Way. 
22 Now, there are many ways in which this great gift is given and they are dependent upon the gifts and talents of the individual. Unto some, it is given to know the mind and will of God without seeing His face. But they receive His image in their countenance. Behold, they walk and talk with the Peacemaker and with angels and need no visual image to return again and remember all wherein they were instructed. And they receive revelation without visions and without dreams, but with pure and simple insight. 
23 And others receive His presence and the presence of angels to instruct them, but cannot remember without the vision and the image of the Instructor. These, because of their gifts and their talents, do go upon the Way with images and visions. Yea, they require such things in order to retain the memory of the instruction. 
24 And still others, must have devices to focus the mind such that they might set aside all distracting thoughts for a space of time. Unto such are given Urim and Thummim, and also Seer Stones and the like. And these are useful tools in the attaining that state of mind which allows them to walk in that intention that is required by the laws and dictates of creation. 
25 And with those who walk upon the Way without visual confirmation, the Gift of Discernment is usually among the strongest of the gifts of the Spirit found in them. And unto they who have the gift of visions and of prophecy, they usually walk upon the Way and must see and hear with images and visions. And unto they who have also the gift of the Seer, devices are most often employed and necessary for them to walk upon the Way. 
26 And these are examples, and but a few. For the gifts of the Spirit are many and they effect upon the manner in which a person does receive revelation. And, since such things are many, the ways in which one might walk upon the Way are also many. And, unto such who have labored diligently to attain all the gifts of the Spirit, the manner in which that person does gain access to the great gift are also many. 
27 And now, I would beseech you and exhort you to seek after every good gift. For, in order that we might be assisted in attaining all the good gifts, the Lord does give unto each some of the gifts of the Spirit through the Holy Ghost. But He does not give all at once, but requires that we make great effort and vest our interest in the attaining of the remainder. And, if we make no good use of the gifts He freely gives, and if we do not improve our time in mortality and seek not more of the good gifts than what He does bestow upon us out of His good grace and desire that we prosper in this life, then we go out of it with only that degree to which we were satisfied to aspire. 
28 But, receiving every good gift with which He sees fit to begin our instruction, if we then step out and work to obtain all the gifts of the Spirit, then we shall surely receive greater truth and knowledge in this life and our understanding shall be greatly expanded. Yea, and though we fail in attaining all the gifts of the Spirit, because we did wear out our lives in diligently seeking them, the Lord shall be the more pleased to open up unto us the mysteries of the Heavens because of our natural efforts in seeking His face. 
29 This is the teaching with which the Nem do instruct their children. For, what mother shall not desire for her child the visions of eternity? And what father shall not desire for his offspring the truth and knowledge and peace that comes by walking and talking with angels? 
30 Behold, it is because that the mothers and fathers in the world do not teach these things that men and women must rely upon the words of others, and this is a very great evil which shall be vexatious. 
31 Behold, in many ways they do enthrall themselves unto wicked men only because they have not been taught to put away the world and seek personal revelation upon the Way according to the good gifts in them. But, if a man or a woman may walk upon the Way and receive revelation daily, they shall rejoice in the truth that springs from that one who is blessed with the gift of prophecy. But behold, they shall not be left without that whereby they may receive also the confirmation of the truth or the interpretation of the prophecy for themselves. They shall become the servants of their fellow man but not their slaves. 
32 Wherefore, again I must beseech you and exhort you, seek after every good gift. And this is done through study, through prayer, through personal sacrifice and through fasting. It is done by diligent effort on the part of the one desiring the gift. For, one cannot receive a gift simply by wishing for it. It is for this cause that the Nem build synagogues for the instruction and support of the people. Yea, and it is for this purpose that the Lord commanded that they call upon the gifted to be teachers and priests unto the people. 
33 And do not pray for the Lord to make you worthy for any gift. Nay, but make yourself so. And do not pray for the Lord to make your intentions pure. Nay, but make them pure. Surely, all that the Lord has taught the sons and daughters of men does instruct in the manner in which this might be done. Therefore, do not importune the Lord to make of you that which ought to be your work. 
34 Surely, the Lord could do it! But He shall not and you shall stand in your sloth at the end of your life and wonder how the Lord could have been so uncharitable unto you. Behold, I say unto you, Judgment is given unto the Peacemaker. Do not take it upon yourself to judge the Lord. 
35 But, if you diligently act to attain to all the gifts of the Spirit, then your actions shall have judged you of pure heart and of pure intent. And the veil shall be rent in you! Yea, and it shall be as if you were born without it in the first place and you shall be a new creation, and set apart from the world. 
36 And when Jesus did visit the People of Corianton, He did tell them of a man of Jerusalem who asked what must be done in order to enter into the Father’s Kingdom. And He answered him, saying: 
37 Unless a man be born again, he may not enter. 
38 And the man asked him: 
39 Can a man enter again into the mother and be born again? 
40 And the Lord answered him again, saying: 
41 Unless you are born of the Water and of the Spirit, you may in no wise enter there. 
42 Now, He was not referring to the birth of the body. To be born of the water is to make a covenant to be of the Body of Christ. That is, to recognize that all things are created by Him and that our matter is His. When we do this we do bear the body of Christ and are born of the Living Waters. 
43 To be born of the Spirit is to have sealed in us the very image of His countenance. In other words, that which we only borrow in mortality, may be made ours for all eternity. This matter, which is Christ’s, is sealed up unto us and we become partakers of everything that is His. 
44 Behold, is this not a mighty change? In this way, we are able to bear His presence because we are born of the Spirit. Yea, we are carried by the Holy Ghost into His presence and may then be presented by Him at the Veil of Heaven, having the mortal veil removed from off our bodies. 
45 And we become a new creature. Our bodies become bodies terrestrial and we are introduced into the Terrestrial World, being no more bound by the telestial and having begun to cast off the world. 
46 It is for this cause that the mothers and the fathers of the children of the Nem do teach their little ones to set aside all distraction and to ponder and meditate upon holy things. And this exercise is most instructive, for it teaches a great principle. Yea, it gives the young person much experience in casting off the things of the world and in preparing to see the face of God. 
47 Wherefore, every Nem sets apart a portion of each day and spends it in this pursuit. Yea, every day becomes a Sabbath to them and every table an altar. For they do dedicate themselves to cleansing the inner vessel and in making themselves fit to be born by the Spirit even into the presence of the Peacemaker, that He may see fit one day to bear each of us into the very presence of the Father and the Mother. Then shall all mysteries be made known unto us. Then shall we also become as They are and receive of Them all things. 
48 But it is also in this thing that they do every day whereby the Nem are counseled and instructed by their kindred dead. For, they whom we call dead are not dead at all, and they do walk upon the Way. And the Nem do not say, “We go to the other side,” or “We go unto the World of Spirits,” for they know that that place and this are the same world, worlds without end. Wherefore, when their hearts are turned to the fathers, the hearts of the fathers are turned even unto them, such that they do walk and talk with the children of their bodies even unto distant generations. 
49 Now, we esteem this to be good, for that they who have passed from this life into the next yet have much that they might teach they who walk and sojourn in the mortal body. Yea, they have lived their lives and learned much. Wherefore, we esteem it good to cleave upon this wisdom and make application of it in our lives. 
50 But behold, if we wish to go the full measure, it is to stand in the presence of the Peacemaker, even He who made this life possible for us, unto which we aspire. But, in order that we might the more fully prepare ourselves to receive so great a blessing, we work diligently upon the Way, having our kindred to be our instructors. 
51 And many there are who are so accomplished in this manner of meditation that they find access to the Way with ease and in any circumstances. They are blessed exceedingly, but such is not the way with me. 
52 Behold, I am filled still with images of times past and they haunt me. Wherefore, to walk upon the Way I must make a ceremony that does focus my thinking and my feeling upon other, more sacred things. And this is the manner of my ceremony: 
53 Behold, I lay down my pallet in a solitary place. Yea, in a lonely and solitary place I do prepare my resting place. It is for this purpose that I built a tower upon the side of the hill which looks down upon Elak Kowa, the place where I do make my abode. And I do lay down a pallet prayerfully upon the floor of the uppermost chamber of the tower. 
54 And the pallet is made of woven reeds and it does represent unto me the world upon which I place my feet. And upon this pallet I do place a beautiful blanket. This blanket does represent unto me the Way. And I do spread the pallet and the blanket before me such that they extend from the East unto the West and I place my bundle in the center thereof, and I sit myself upon the East thereof. This is the altar of my meditation and my prayers are my sacrifice upon the altar. 
55 And when I open my bundle it is to pray and to meditate and to walk upon the Way. And sometimes I open my bundle to celebrate the good things of the earth. But, for the most part, it is to pray and to meditate and to walk upon the Way that I do open the sacred bundle. 
56 And the bundle of my prayer is made of finely prepared hide of the kirlu, which is a blithe and comely beast found in profusion upon the hills and mountains of the Valley of Mentina. And the hair of the hide is removed therefrom and the skin is bleached and prepared and is very fine and soft. 
57 This breech represents the garment placed upon the First Man and the First Woman by the Lord when He taught them the Law of Chastity, and it signifies to me the manner in which the Peacemaker does prepare the rough and coarse thing that is man in order that he might stand in His presence. Yea, bleached and whitened, softened and prepared, we do stand before the Creator of all things and the Finisher of all things. Wherefore, I do work the skin of one kirlis and I prepare it and it is the covering of my prayer bundle. 
58 And within the bundle are found the articles with which I do make an oblation unto the Lord. And the articles are wrapped in the kirlum. And within the kirlum they are wrapped in red cloth. Yea, in red they are wrapped and placed within packets made of the skin of the kurlis and they are placed within the kirlum. And these are placed within the prayer bundle. 
59 And, when the bundle is opened, it is done with great reverence and with prayer. Yea, I do beseech the Holy Ghost in mighty prayer and in song to be present as I open the bundle. And I do open the kirlum in which the articles of the bundle are kept and I do lay the red cloth out from the East unto the West in the center of the bundle. 
60 And these are the articles which I place in the prayer bundle. Behold, I place the bowl of a pipe which I have made with my own hands, as also the stem of the pipe, within the kirlum. And the bowl of the pipe is made such that it contains a square, and this represents the straitness of the way which leads unto the Peacemaker. It is the sign of the square. And the bowl of the pipe is made of stone, even from among the first created, and it is carved of my own hand. And when I take it out, I do lay it upon its covering. 
61 And the stem of my pipe is straight and strong, and it is made of a wood that is known by the healers of Mentina to give a berry, the seed of which is useful in strengthening the heart. Yea, and this tree does bear thorns which are like, it is said, unto the crown which the Peacemaker bore upon His head in the day that He was taken by the world and subjected unto death. It is also said to represent the pointer of the Liahona which our fathers Lehi and Nephi took with them into the wilderness. Therefore, it is the sign of the compass, and it is this wood that I used to fashion the stem of my pipe. 
62 And when I place the red cloth upon the kirlum, I do also place the stem of the pipe upon this cloth. This is to signify that I place my heart upon that road or that path which leads unto Him and that I do dedicate my life and my sacrifice unto Him, even as He did dedicate His life and His sacrifice unto me. 
63 And I also have a multicolored shell that is the size of my hand which I use as my bowl of incense. And the use of this bowl is described in another place. The multicolored shell signifies my thanks for the multitude of blessings for which I do offer up my oblation and my sacrifice. 
64 Yea, for the Peacemaker speaks peace unto my soul and were it not for this peace, I know not that I could stand the length of the day. For, the sun looks down upon all my transgressions and my sins, and if the sun may see me all the day long, then why not my God? And I know not that I could live with the agony of my deeds were it not for the peace which my Lord does speak unto my soul. 
65 And this peace cannot be described in one color. For, it is not the rising or setting of the sun, but it is much more. And it is not encompassed by all the learning of the wise men, but it is much more. And it cannot be encompassed by the whole earth, for it is too great. And it cannot be fathomed, for it is as deep as a soul. Wherefore, I describe this peace in the color of the shell, which is all colors at once, and yet all colors singly. 
66 And when I take out the bowl of incense, I do place it upon its own kirlum upon the bundle. 
67 And I do keep sacred essences within the bundle for use as oblations. And they are kept within their own kirlum and are placed thereon upon the bundle. And these essences contain sacred and healing herbs and also the blood of healing of significant trees. And these are used as the smoke of incense when I open the prayer bundle. 
68 And also within the bundle I keep a cord of green with which I do gird myself, and a shawl of many colors with which I do cover myself, when I open the prayer bundle. And this is also in accordance with that which has been recorded in another place, even in Oug’s Book of the High Place. 
69 And I do open the prayer bundle in a sacred manner, even with much song and mighty prayer. And I take of the precious essences and I do purify all the articles of the bundle, as also myself, with a sweet and purifying odor. And this does signify how sweet and purifying is my walk and my talk with the Peacemaker, my Lord. 
70 And when I have made a song of thanksgiving and a purifying ordinance, I take up the bowl of the pipe and I unite it with the stem of the pipe. And this signifies that I do unify my soul with the Peacemaker and that I do aspire to be sealed up His. 
71 And I do fill the bowl of the pipe with sacred herb and I make a ceremony of Sacred Breath. And this is the manner of the ceremony: 
72 Because I do desire that the Great and Heavenly Father might be with me, I do raise the pipe in offering to the heavens and I sing for the guidance of the Holy Ghost. 
73 And, because I do desire that the Great and Heavenly Mother might be with me, I do raise the pipe in offering and touch it to the bundle and I sing for the guidance of the Holy Ghost. 
74 And I do raise the pipe in offering toward the West and pray for all the good things of the earth and all wisdom in the application of them. And I do sing for the guidance of the Holy Ghost. 
75 And I do raise the pipe in offering toward the North and pray for the presence of Heavenly Beings in my life. And I do sing for the guidance of the Holy Ghost. 
76 And I do raise the pipe in offering toward the East and pray for the visitation of my kindred dead and for the gifts of the Spirit. And I do sing for the guidance of the Holy Ghost. 
77 And I do raise the pipe in offering toward the South and I pray for the strength and the will to repent of my deeds. And I do sing for the guidance of the Holy Ghost. 
78 And I do touch the bowl of the pipe to my own heart and describe a circle with the pipe in offering. This I do in order that I might remind myself of the sacred covenant I have made to my people, that we may be of one heart and one mind and have all things in common. 
79 Then I do smoke the sacred herb and blow the smoke in the four directions. 
80 And behold, it is in this sacred breath that I do cease to be harrowed up by the past, and I find peace enough to go upon the Way. For in thanksgiving only, am I able to be still and know God. 
81 Now, this has also become a pattern with those who do not use the Sacred Pipe, but prefer to use the Bowl of Incense instead, as is described in the archives. And this is the preference of most women among the Nem of Mentina. 


CHAPTER 10 
1 Now, I am one who must set aside more than simply the things of the world in order to find that stillness that must be acquired if one wishes to walk upon the Way. Yea, I have seen and done things that in moments of war must be justified by the mind of man, that the work of death might go forward. And behold, this is a thing that prevents the mind and the heart from finding that stillness that is needed to walk upon the Way, and it is the reason that hardly shall any man of war be admitted there. 
2 And there are many such distractions in our daily walk that might prove to be an impediment to us all. Wherefore, it is expedient to choose that way of life that will most effectively remove from our minds the clamor and the noise of daily living, that we might choose a better thing. 
3 It is for this cause that the Lord led our forefathers out of the Land Southward. For they saw in the Nephite way of living an obstacle to the continuation of peace. Yea, the Nephites did begin to lust after the things of the world and to gather to themselves all manner of riches. This did quickly become an obstacle to them and a stumbling block. 
4 And we cannot discern any difference in their manner of living and their manner of worship in the end. In every thing they did seek to heap up rewards and to deliver punishments, both at home and in the synagogues. This is a thing most ruinous to a nation. 
5 But the Nem do choose a better way and, because of this choice, they have no impediment that may not be overcome. Yea, their manner of worship does remind them everyday that their peace does come out of the sacrifice of every member of the community. And they feel no need to heap reward upon each other for their goodness, for the Lord does abundantly reward them out of the natural consequences of their choices. And they have no need of punishment or coercion in their dealings with their fellows, for they esteem all people equally and do not set themselves up as the judge of their brother’s worthiness. 
6 Yea, the Nem do exercise great faith at home and in the synagogue and their every action does serve to remind them of the nature of the creation and also their part and duty in it. 
7 The purification of the Ammonites is practiced among the Nem, but it has become an ordinance that is practiced more often by men than by women. For, it is expedient that men learn the way of sacrifice, even to the extent that they may make a living sacrifice for the sake of all living. Women do make this sacrifice by and through their very creation and nature. Wherefore, it is not expedient for them, howbeit, there are those who do participate in it. But the men must find living ways to learn this manner of sacrifice and they set their feet upon this path by and through the ordinance passed down to us from our forefathers. 
8 And this purification does cleanse the body of evils that can inhibit the spirit. That which this purification does cast out of the body does often contribute to clouding the mind and this can become an obstacle to obtaining that inner peace that is required in order that one might walk upon the Way. 
9 And the men and women of the Nem do use those ceremonies in which the use of sacred and healing smoke is employed. This kind of purification does also help the mind and the body find peace. And they also use ordinances and ceremonies which do utilize the essences of plants, even the pure essences of them, and this does have effect upon the body and the spirit in many ways beneficial to the attaining of that state of mind necessary to walk upon the Way. 
10 And behold, the Nem do also fast often with their families. And this they do not in the sight of others, but they do it secretly. And they do not communicate their fasting to others, to be seen of them, but they do it often and in private. 
11 And also the ordinances of the High Place do cause a change in the character and countenances of the people. For, in them they are introduced into the Terrestrial World and this does remind them of their purpose. 
12 And behold, because of the nature of the Nem way of life, even the Law of Consecration, men and women are constantly reminded of their purpose. For, it is certain that, as men and women serve each other and work diligently to shoulder the burdens of their fellows, their burdens are indeed lifted. And this applies to their physical burdens and to their spiritual burdens equally. 
13 For, it is very often the carnal burdens that do create obstacles and impediments to attaining to that peace that does allow us to walk upon the Way, and to live as the Nem do relieves many of these burdens. The relief of the earthly does often cause an enlightening. And, in addition to the obvious physical blessing of our way of life, we do also enjoy much spiritual liberty because of it. 
14 Now, what man may not admit that in the midst of strife and worry over the getting of gain, there is burden? And who will deny that such a striving does not begin to consume every hour of the day and every thought and feeling of the heart? It is entirely true and proved daily. Or what beggar does not spend all his day begging and wondering when he shall next eat and where he shall next lay down his head to rest? And what father of the Nephites had any time to contemplate anything greater than bringing in the crop? And, in the end, did he not hurry in all things so that the Gadiantons could not make away with his living? 
15 Behold, the Nem are not bound up in such worries and such pursuits. Because we provide in all things for one another, there are no beggars. And because we do not heap up riches, we are not desired by the Gadiantons. And this is a great blessing to us. 
16 And because our men and our women do not strive day by day against nature simply to live, they have time to contemplate the beauty of nature. And, because we are not set upon by our neighbors in competition for our goods, we have leisure to enjoy the company of our fellows. And because we have a surplus, we also have time to give thought to the blessings and wonders of creation and to approach our God. 
17 Is this not ample proof that the Nem way is good and to be recommended to bring about happiness? 


CHAPTER 11 
1 Now, when I had filled the seat of high priest of Mentina for the space of twenty and five years, the people of the city numbered too many and the land became burdened. Yea, and the people did begin to take too much from the land and from the mountains, and they began to hurt the land. Wherefore, it was determined in the Councils that the residents must split up and divide into smaller communities. But there was some strife in deciding who would go and who would stay. 
2 For, many of the families of Mentina had lived in the city for many generations and they loved their city. Wherefore, it did come to pass that some refused any method of determining who might go and who might stay. And they denied the right and authority of the Council to make such determination. Yea, and it did seem that the people were about to experience contention and dissent in the city. 
3 But, I would exhort you to consider the rights of the people of the city. Did the Council have authority to decide who must go and who must stay? Or what power does the Council have over the people of Mentina if no complaint of injury against any person has been placed before them? I say to you, they have none. Wherefore, the Council did attempt to take up authority from the people to which they were not entitled. And this thing did cause much strife in all the city and much dissension. 
4 And it became my duty, as high priest of the city, to ask the people to recommend what action must be taken. And the people decided to dissolve the Council of Mentina and called a Council of Mothers to elect a new Community Council. And this decision was accepted by the Council of Mentina and the members did stand down. 
5 And the Mothers of all the families of the city and the environs round about it over which the city held sway, did meet together and they did prayerfully consider names. And they did nominate twelve people to recommend to the people. But behold, the people did not elect all of those nominated and the Council was not filled. Wherefore, the Mother’s Council did meet again to consider names and they did nominate seven and recommended them to the people. And behold, only three of them were elected by the people. And the Mothers met again and nominated four more and the people did elect them. 
6 And the Peli Council did also meet and compiled a list of all the names of the greatest Healers in the community and did send the list to the new Council of Mentina. And the Council did elect from the list of names one person and she became the Talking Feather of the Council. 
7 And these are the names of the men and women who sat on the Council of Mentina before the election: Ayimlekt, Shi-Tosinlit, Nephi-Im, Pa Parim, Shi-Melek, Shi-Echinmet, Shi-Panishim, Pa Torieth, Hemnietem-Im, Phahorem, Pa Penith, and Mentineth. 
8 And they did step down from the Council. 
9 And these are the names of the men and women who were elected by the people: Ayimlekt, Shi-Tosinlit, Temnet, Pa Parim, Shi-Melek, Shi-Echinmet, Shi-Panishim, Pamath, Ishimemet, Pa Mentina, Pa Penith, and Hemeniet. 
10 And the Council chose Natanhim to be the Talking Feather. 
11 And behold, when the Council of Mentina met, they too determined that the population of the city had grown too great and that the city must be depopulated. But they did not seek ways whereby the people might determine who must go and who must stay. They counseled the denizens only upon the great peril to their city and to the environment around it should they not reduce the burden upon the land and did not seek to take up authority to act upon the matter. 
12 And the people of the city did begin to assemble together and discuss the matter, and many made preparations to take their stewardships to another place and to create a new city. And this was after the designs of my heart, for I desired that the people make the decision themselves. For, if the ways of the Nem are to be preserved, the people must do it, and my heart was gladdened that the people of Mentina discerned the risk, both to their good land, but also to their ways and customs, and they did correct themselves in the right way. 
13 Now, there were cities in that place where Hagoth and his little band of sojourners first made their settlement, which had been all but abandoned because they did not heed the earth’s warning. Yea, the people of that city refused to leave when they had grown too large and they did entirely use up the good of the land. And behold, they were forced to leave all at once and in haste, abandoning home and shop, barn and field. And they left behind them ghostly and empty cities wherein only a few lonesome people now live. 
14 Behold, I say to you, this would have been the fate of Mentina. For, the land may bear only so many souls without hurt. And when the land we walk upon is hurt, she does not give of her bounty. Shall any city do this in this fair land you shall see want and hunger. Yea, you shall see drought and famine. And young men shall do hurt and young women also. 
15 And this they did even to the utter collapse of their cities in the land where the great river turns to the north, where our fathers set up their first place of settlement. And behold, this was not just one city, but many, and they all collapsed seemingly at once because they would not divide and walk gently upon the earth. Yea, and they did continue to cut down the trees for their houses and their fuel. And, when the snow melted in the spring, the water ran out of control into the canyons and was taken away. Wherefore, there was nothing for the crops when the sun did beat down upon them. 
16 And behold, the soil also was carried away by the spring running and also be the summer winds. And there remained not enough to nourish the crops through the season and they failed. And the people did use up their surplus hoping that the next year would be better, or that there would be rain, or that the snows would not run so swiftly from off the mountains. But behold, there was no change and they all became beggars and, like beggars, they did all put their things upon their backs and they left the place of their habitation and came even into other cities of the Nem for refuge. 
17 Now, this was a complete collapse of their society and of their cities. They did not stray one by one out of the place of their habitation. Rather, they left all at once leaving behind home and hearth. 
18 Now the streets of their cities and settlements are left empty and the dogs gambol in the alleyways. Their gardens wither and their vines do not give fruit, for there is none to tend them. Their houses stand as testimony against them and the voice of laughter and singing is not heard in their synagogues. 
19 There is no provender in the storehouse and those very few who remained continue to seek the succor of their neighbors until they too may leave in safety. 
20 Yea, Zion is left desolate because of the intentions of the Nem of that region. 
21 Their granaries are barren and their cisterns are dry. Their vats press out no wine and the Nem wander in search of what help they may find in the desert places. 
22 The wind sings through the streets and only wild animals enjoy their avenues. The lonely sound of their empty cities call out to the traveler and cause him to turn the foot from its ghostly welcome. 
23 For the Nem of that region have all left their homes and come unto other places. They have come away all at once and have left nothing behind them but their memories. 
24 Behold, this shall be the future of all the Nem, should they fail to keep the commandments of God and follow Him in His paths. Yea, if the people cease to strive with God, He shall cease to strive with them. Or, shall He reveal unto us the ways in which we might live peaceably with our fellows, and also with the earth, and we turn from that revelation? And, if we do, what shall be the outcome? Shall we not reap that which we sow because we are Nem? Are the Nem so favored of the Lord that He will ignore us when we disobey His voice and give no heed to His counsel? 
25 For, we do rely upon the Lord to cause the rain to fall upon our crops. And we do believe Him when He says that He is the font of living water. And shall we use up the good of the earth before His very face and cry to Him for protection? Shall we lift up our stiff necks and praise Him? Or shall we raise ourselves up on a pillar and cry unto Him, that all might see us? Are we so favored that the decree of the Lord concerning this land shall no longer be esteemed by the Nem? 
________________


26 The Lord of the Harvest has established this place as a land flowing with milk and honey. Shall we throw it in His face and tread upon His counsel? If we do, we shall do it to our peril. For, who can follow the Lord in this thing and yet set that thing aside for another time and another people? Shall we choose out from among the revelations this one or that one to which we shall take heed? Or shall we set one set of books aside and esteem them of no value? 
27 Shall any people rely upon their own counsel and set aside the counsel of God, they shall surely be left alone to reap their reward. For, the Lord gives of His bounty freely unto they who will listen unto His voice. And He shall even bless them that know not His voice, but do well. But, unto that people who know His voice and openly defy Him, He shall not pour out a blessing upon them and the earth shall not give of her generosity. And it matters not what such a people call themselves, be it Mentinite, or Witchitite, or Nespelite, or Nephite, or Lamanite, or Levite, they shall all be the same who tread upon the counsels of the Lord God. 
28 Now behold, the valley called Meninta, wherein lies the city of Mentina, is not so unlike to the valley called Hagoth that we might enjoy a different fate should we do as the Nem of Hagoth did. Yea, our valley shall not be filled with fields and meadows and our mountains crowned with great towering trees, if we fail to walk gently upon the land. Yea, our streams and our springs shall dry up also, should we do the same, and our beautiful garden place shall become a desert and wither. 
29 And behold, what became of those cities in the place of Hagoth’s first habitation in this Land Northward, shall become of all they who gather into multitudes of people too large for the land to bear. Yea, the land shall carry them only so long, even as an ass does bow under his load. But load the ass too heavily and push him too harshly and he will kick off his burden and run away from you. So too shall this fair land kick off her burden and turn her face from us. 
CHAPTER 12 
1 And when the people had heard the words of the Council, they did of their own will divide themselves equitably and some stayed in Mentina and others did remove a day’s journey from it and establish a new city. And this new city was also larger than that which the people had decided was the limit which the earth could bear in that place and others did continue on to another place to establish their home. And thus they did until all the people had moved southward in large enough intervals that they would not press too greatly upon the land and overrun her ability to provide for them. 
2 And even our own Elak Kowa became too large and my son did take his family and several of the young men into the north to make a community of their own. For, he desired that his wife and children should live yet a little closer to the Nem of Nespelem. 
3 And behold, the Nem of my own city desired that I be called to be the high priest and to preside over them in their ordinances and celebrations. But I was still the high priest of Mentina and could not do duty to both at once. And my own city pressed me and desired me to serve in my own home and not go upon the road so often to Mentina to preside in the High Place there. 
4 For, the Nem of Elak Kowa had built the High Place in our own city and they had many synagogues also wherein they did study the books and the records. And they did meet together often in Councils established by the people. Yea, in all ways, the city of Elak Kowa had become a city exactly as Mentina, with all the same goings on, and the people declared their desire that I sit in the seat of high priest of the city. 
5 And the Council of Elak Kowa did send an epistle unto the Council of Mentina desiring them to release me from the seat of high priest, that I might more fully serve my own city. 


6 And behold, the Council of Mentina did take up the matter and prayerfully consider it. And, after much debate, the Council decided that I was not to be constrained to serve them for any reason, lest I be driven by such folly to take the course of Heinmet and resign the seat. 
7 Wherefore, I was released from the seat of high priest of the City of Mentina and my own city called me to preside. And I did become the high priest of Elak Kowa and I did no longer spend my time traveling to and from the City of Mentina. 
8 And behold, I did enjoy greater liberty than I had while laboring for the City of Mentina and it was my pleasure to use that time in teaching the men and women of my own city. For, many of the men were those Nephites who had come from out of the Nephite and Lamanite war and they had need of much counsel. Wherefore, I now had much more time to dedicate to their service. 
9 And Elak Kowa did grow and prosper, and many settlements did also grow up around it and we did spread ourselves upon the land north of the City of Mentina. 
10 And I did call and set up high priests unto all the settlements, which was a thing that had not been done very often. For, the high priest of Mentina did heretofore preside over all matters spiritual for all the cities round about the Valley of Mentina, but it was very difficult for the cities to receive of the high priest all that they needed. 
11 And this was also the case with the settlements that sprang up in the north part of the valley. Wherefore, rather than that they should come always unto me in Elak Kowa for all their needs, I did establish high priests for them in their Lodges. 
12 And I did cause that they should call teachers and priests to instruct in the synagogues and to administer the ordinances of baptism and also the sacrament of the Lord’s supper unto the people. Now, these are they whom we call Peli. And they are men or women whom the community sees are of good heart and pure intention. And their names are given unto the high priest of the city for consideration for callings in the administration of such things. Wherefore, when a teacher or priest is needed for any of the synagogues, the high priest takes up the list of names which the Council has provided and inquires of the Lord as to who should be called. And, if the list contains not the name of that person whom the Lord sees fit to install, by the word of His commission unto the high priest, then the name of the candidate is given to the high priest through revelation. 
13 But behold, any person of good intention may officiate in the administration of the ordinances of baptism and of the sacrament of the Lord’s supper. And any person of good intention is equal to the task of leading the instruction of the people. For, they all do instruct their own children in their homes constantly and this does prepare all the Nem to become teachers and priests. 
14 And those ordinances which are done only in the home, such as the blessing and naming of children, blessing of the sick and the afflicted, the bestowal of the blessing whereby the people are reminded to receive the Holy Ghost, the ordinances of the High Place and all those things that must be taught at home to prepare for them, behold, all these things are administered by the parents of children or by the Peli, as each family shall choose and call for their edification. 
15 And behold, the Nem of Nespelem did begin to administer the bread and wine of the Lord’s supper every time they met together to be instructed of the teachers and priests. And this became a custom with us, to celebrate the covenant that the Lord made with the Father and with the Holy Ghost, every time we meet for any reason. 
16 Yea, when we gather to plant, we celebrate this sacrament, as also when we harvest. And when we build a house or a barn, we celebrate this sacrament. And when we meet a stranger on our way, we pause with them and welcome them, and we celebrate with them this sacrament. And behold, when any member of our family comes or goes away, we take time to celebrate this sacrament with them when they arrive from a journey or before the depart from us. 
17 And this we do in order that we may keep in our remembrance always that thing which the Lord has done for us. And we do it also that we may always have His spirit with us, or, in other words, that because we remember Him in all that we do, we might become in all ways like unto Him and take upon ourselves, and cultivate in ourselves that spirit wherewith He did teach us to govern our lives. 
18 But this is not all. When we do this, keeping the covenant which He made with the Father and with the Holy Ghost, we are made partakers of that covenant also. Therefore, if we have His spirit to be with us, and if we do govern ourselves by that spirit which we have received of Him, we shall also be assured of the covenant relationship with the Father and with the Holy Ghost that He also enjoys. 
19 For behold, it is by the power of the Father that we have our being. Yea, and because of the covenant which He made with the Mother, we have our lives and we are also partakers of that covenant. And it is by the power of the Holy Ghost that all things may be brought to our remembrance and be confirmed in us. Yea, by the power of the Holy Ghost we may become like our Father and Mother in Heaven. And it is because of the atonement which was accomplished by the Lord, even the Peacemaker, that we may come into communion with Heavenly Beings. Wherefore, we do participate as often as we can make excuse to do so in that covenant which they made together. 
20 And when we meet in formal assembly, which is our custom in the synagogues, we do not sit ourselves according to rank or calling, for there is no caste within the Nem but we are all servants. Yea, the synagogues are built in a circle or hoop fashion, as has been described in another place, and the priests and teachers sit in the center. And when they teach, they do stand in order that all may hear their words. But behold, they do not stand because they are above any other person in rank or caste. 
21 And when we meet, the priest leads the people in prayer, or asks that someone lead in prayer. For, when we come together in assembly, either for worship and oblation, or for councils, we do wish the Lord to be there with us. For it is expedient that we have the assistance and counsel of the Lord in all things, to help us with what we are about to do. Wherefore, we do pray first in earnest entreaty to have the Lord with us, and also the Holy Ghost. 
22 And also when we meet together in assembly we do sing songs of praise unto the Lord. Yea, we do lift up our voices in song and thanksgiving unto the Lord whenever we do assemble ourselves together. And whenever a new song is written, we ask our teachers to instruct us in it. For, the song of thanksgiving is a prayer unto the Lord and we know that the Lord does rejoice in our thanksgiving, for He has informed us that it is so. 
23 And when we have prayed for the presence of Heavenly Beings, and when we have all taken of the bread and wine of the Lord’s supper, the teacher stands and reads from the scriptures. And when this is done, the teacher sometimes expounds upon what has been read as the Spirit gives utterance. And also, if any person is moved upon by the Holy Ghost, they also stand in their place and speak the words which come to their hearts. But more often, the people take thought in that which has been read without much talking, for the Holy Ghost is a mighty instructor. 
24 And when this is all done, the teacher leads us in more song and the priest leads us once again in prayer. And the people embrace each other and the assembly is concluded. 
25 And this is the custom among all the Nem when they meet in assembly together. And behold, the priests and teachers assist us always in our understandings and in our oblations. 
26 Now, it is the priest who is given the charge and the stewardship of the care and keeping of the synagogue, and this does often take away from the time necessary for the priest to labor for the support of the family and for the creating of surplus. And the Nem do not begrudge the priest anything that is required in order to maintain the synagogue in good order. Wherefore, the people all do give of their surplus to the priest because of the labor which is required on the part of the people. And no priest is ever left in a state of want, for this would be the shame and the dishonor of the people. 
27 But the teachers are not asked to do more than the people themselves do in order to fulfill the stewardship that has been placed upon them. Wherefore, they are not made beggars by their stewardship and make no entreaty because of it. 
28 And there is always a font of water kept at the synagogue in readiness for any who might wish to be baptized. And this font is kept clean and the water is kept fresh each day. And when any person desires to renew the covenant which they have made with the Lord, and the people do this often, they come to the priest and ask for the ordinance. Or they bring with them that member of their family who does act as Peli for them in this ordinance and the priest leads them in it in a sacred manner. 
29 And when a sojourner or a stranger first arrives in the city, they go unto the priest and make themselves known. And their needs are made known to the priest first, and also their intention. And the priest takes their petition to the high priest immediately, and their want is fulfilled out of the storehouse of the city. Then, once care is taken to assure that they do not want for their physical needs, they may make their introduction to the Council and, if it is their intention to stay and become part of the community, they receive their stewardship from the Council. 
30 Wherefore, the Nem are careful to maintain that the priest of the synagogue always has somewhat of a surplus to care for the wayfarer and the stranger. And they also bring as much of their surplus as they cannot keep adequately themselves to the storehouses of the city, that there be no waste of the surplus of the people. And this is kept in good order by the high priest of the city and those the Council calls to assist in this labor as part of their stewardship. But behold, all that can be adequately kept in the homes of the Nem, they do keep themselves and they do administer it to the needy. 
31 But neither the priest of the synagogue nor the high priest are left without that which is needed to immediately assist the stranger, the visitor, or the wayfarer. For, it is oft the case that such is their state that the wayfarer arrives in the city in desperate need and the priest is called upon to assist with haste. Wherefore, we always maintain that the priest, whom we call to be a shepherd to the people and a servant, has a store of that which is needed to be of speedy assistance. 
32 Behold, I am reminded of the day that I did arrive in Mentina from the Nephite wars. I and my companions whom I had gathered along the way were in desperate need of assistance. And behold, because of the custom of the Nem, we had no need of making our petition to the Council, but rather, our needs were immediately met by the priest of the synagogue. For, the first person to see us approaching the city ran out to greet us and, seeing that we were desperate from our long journey and hungry, took us directly to the priest. 
33 And the priest of the synagogue nearest to the southern approach to the city, for this is the direction in which we did arrive in Mentina, having crossed a great desert and traversed the mountains, was a woman of great spirit and presence of mind. And the Nem had made sure that she had a store of those things most required by the wayfarer. And she did take us in without question or interview, and she did succor us and give us that which we most required, being a place to wash ourselves, sound food and medicine with wine to revive us, and a place to lay ourselves down to rest. And when we were revived, for we were in sore want, she administered the sacrament of the Lord’s supper with us and revived our spirits as well. Then did we go up unto the Council and give our report of the war and its outcome. 
34 Now, this is a good custom. For we were desperate for assistance, having come from afar off. And behold, we were strangers in a strange city. And our appearance was exceedingly rough. Yea, we did appear as vagabonds straight from who might know what mischief. But, because of the custom of the people, no one was called upon to judge our intention. The Nem took care of our immediate needs first. For, it is also the custom that newcomers come unto the Council to introduce themselves and it is the stewardship of the Council to ascertain one’s intentions. 
35 But behold, it is the stewardship of every individual to feed the hungry and clothe the naked. And it is the calling of each man and woman to give rest to the weary and to lift up the hands that hang down. This is the commission of every man or woman which is given unto them of Jesus Christ, who is the Peacemaker. Above all other stewardships that might be given of men, this one stewardship is given of the Lord and the Nem need no commandment or reminder in it. They do assure that all who come wanting into their cities are cared for speedily. 
36 For, are we not all wayfarers? Do we not all travel together the road upon which our Lord has placed us? And can we say that this road is always pleasant and never rough? Or is it true that we always go upon our way knowing exactly what will become of us or how our journey will fare? Can any of us predict one day to the next with certainty? 
37 I say unto you, Nay. For we have not all things before us and cannot see the end from the beginning. And if we are all wayfarers, it is good to remember that we may at time fare ill in our journey and require speedy assistance to save our very lives. If this be the case with us, how can we begrudge our substance to any other? Yea, and how can we, who have plenty and to spare, fail to make preparations before the time of need to provide for them who have not? Because we are blind to all that might befall us, is it not wisdom to make preparations? 
38 But behold, it is a peculiar thing among the Nem that we do make preparations not for ourselves, but it is for others that we make preparation, yea, we do it to be of service to our neighbor. For, what good would our surplus be to him that immediately needs if he must first find us who have made preparation to make his entreaty? For immediate aid, such a thing would profit no one. Wherefore, we put up in store in order that no petition may go up unheard and unheeded, nay, not even for a moment. 
39 Now, all the commissions given of Christ for to fulfill His purposes are called by us the Priesthood of God. Yea, it is by His commission that priests and teachers are called to assist us and to attend to the synagogues. And it is by His commission that the high priest sees to the management of the High Place and of the surplus of the city and its keeping. And it is by His commission that mothers and fathers do teach their children and also the stranger in their house. And it is by His commission that families do sometimes assign Peli with a special calling to assist them with the ordinances and the sacrifices. Behold, the commission of the Lord is the priesthood and it is the responsibility of every person to obtain it. 
40 The priest is not the priesthood. Nay, and the high priest is not the priesthood. It is that specific word of God that comes to the individual by and through the Holy Ghost that conveys the commission to the heart and soul of a man or a woman. 
41 And behold, when this commission is come into the soul of a person, they come to the priest or the high priest, or to the Peli of a family, and they request a blessing of them to confirm by token and by the laying on of hands of that which has been received of the Lord. And the priest, the high priest or the Peli shall give whatever words of prophecy or counsel to which the Holy Ghost may give utterance, and this becomes a witness and an assistance to the individual in fulfilling that commission whereby the Lord has called them. 
42 And if the high priest does call upon a person from out of the names provided by the people to be a priest or teacher unto them, they may not take up the calling until they have sought the confirmation of the Holy Ghost that they have received the commission of the Lord in it. And if they receive not this confirmation, they do not accept the call, but they do ask the high priest to go again unto the Lord in prayer to affirm the matter. 
43 Behold, the priesthood of God is a serious matter to the Nem and we do not trifle with it. It is not given to any person without the clear and certain commission of the Lord. And this commission comes to a person by and through the power of the Holy Ghost. 
44 Now, there is nothing that the is necessary for the salvation of the soul that the Lord might command that differs from the covenant that He did enter into with the Father and with the Holy Ghost. Wherefore, women, having already received the saving grace and commission of the Mother, already possess the priesthood of God. But behold, they must also receive a confirmation of the calling before taking it up for the Lord. 
45 But men have not this grace from their birth and must receive it from the Peacemaker. This is why the Nem do confer upon those men who are called of God, the priesthood after the orders thereof. And they are ordained to the offices that are assigned thereto by the laying on of hands after that they have received the commission. Behold, only they who have received the commission of the Lord to do so may confer or ordain by the laying on of hands. 
46 Whereas, women are called to the office with a holy calling and a blessing by the laying on of hands as a token of the commission only. For they have the priesthood already conferred upon them and shall anyone confer that which is already given? 
47 And how shall anyone know that they have truly received the commission and that they do act according to word and will of the Lord? Behold, they do not set themselves up or apart from their neighbors. Nay, they do not wear special attire which sets them apart. And they do not set a mark of any kind upon themselves to give them distinction, that all might look and see that they possess the priesthood of God. 
48 It is the responsibility of every person to seek the confirmation of the Holy Ghost that any person has the right to speak and act in the name of God. And this is done every time an ordinance that requires the commission of the Lord is to be performed. Behold, the participants shall fast and pray, and if they receive not the confirmation that the right individual has been chosen to perform the ordinance, they return again to fasting and prayer. 
49 Behold, these things are of such import that they are never rushed into. And if the confirmation of the Holy Ghost is not received, the person is not judged worthy or unworthy. It is merely that they have not the commission of the Lord in that thing at that time. For, the priesthood of God is not a thing that is given to all and all at once. It is a thing that must be cultivated and cared for throughout one’s life. 
50 Yea behold, I may receive the commission on one day and then on the next I may be found in anger against my neighbor. In that moment I have lost the commission of the Lord. It is only after I have repented and made good my error that the commission returns unto me. Therefore, the priesthood becomes a constant reminder to each individual of the determinate need to be in constant harmony with the Lord in all things. It is in this way that the Lord uses the priesthood to teach and to train us to become like Him in all things. 
51 And so great is the import of this principle that it has been revealed and written that no man may take up this honor unto himself, but that he is called of God as was Aaron, the brother of Moses the prophet. 
52 Now, Aaron was called up to the office of high priest unto his people by the mouth of a prophet of God. But do you suppose that this was done without Aaron’s having received any intelligence of it? Nay, believe it not, for I say unto you that Aaron did inquire of the Lord in the matter. And, after that he had spent much time and effort in repenting of his faults and his errors, the Lord did convey unto him through the power of the Holy Ghost the commission to do all that the prophet called him to do. 
53 And Moses and Aaron were sons of Levi and they did answer the call of the Lord and they did act according to the commission of the Lord. Therefore, they did possess the priesthood and were justified in all that they did in righteousness. 
54 Does that mean that they were justified in all things because they had the priesthood of God? I say unto you, Nay. Behold how neither of them were allowed to go down into the promised land but were taken from the earth before the children of Israel received their inheritance. 
55 Wherefore, take heed all you who would claim to possess the right and power to speak and act in the name of Jesus Christ, the Peacemaker. Yes, have a care what you do and say in His name. For, if you seek not to be commissioned in all things and in all times, the priesthood shall be a thing of naught in you and, though you claim to have received it by ordinance after a set pattern, you shall speak the name of the Lord in vain and you shall lay upon Him actions that are not His. Behold, you shall sow great confusion in the day that you do this. Yea, a generation may go into confusion before the Lord will correct your evil. 


CHAPTER 13 
1 It is written that Noah did plant for himself a vineyard, for he was an husbandman. And he did harvest the fruit of his vine and he did make of it pure wine. And when he did drink of his wine he became drunken with it and he went into his tabernacle for to sleep. 
2 And behold, his son Ham did enter into the tent and he did see his father’s nakedness. And when he had done this thing, he did return out of the tent. And when his brethren discovered the act, they did the opposite of their brother Ham and they did walk with their father’s raiment upon their shoulders, being chaste. Yea, they obtained all the teaching of their father and they were priests and prophets to their people. 
3 And Noah did curse his son Ham and he was denied the thing that is most to be desired, even that which allows a man to gain access to heavenly beings and to emerge from out of this clay and set aside the beast. For, this is that heritage which might have been sufficient to correct in Ham that aberration of character which led him into unnatural love. But Ham, being caught up in the carnal lust of his heart, knew not what he had lost. 
4 And Pharaoh, his grandson, though he was reported to be a righteous man and a righteous king, nevertheless he did preserve a heritage of wickedness because of that thing of his father’s that he chose to continue. Surely he did no injury to his fellowman. But he was caught up in the carnality to which his grandfather fell prey. Behold, this is the curse that was preserved by Pharaoh and by Egyptus, for through them this same curse continued. 
5 And behold, the scriptures assure us that Pharaoh desired what he thought to be the right of priesthood, but he was denied because of the curse which he had helped to preserve. And all his descendents who would not repent of this evil, were also denied the commission of the Lord. 
6 For, it is only through the bonding together of the unique endowment of power of the mother and of the father that we may hope to become as our Father and Mother in Heaven. And it is only by emerging out of this telestial into a terrestrial sphere that we may be more fully instructed by angels, the spirits of just men and women made perfect, and by the Lord Himself. 
7 And behold, it would have been for Pharaoh just as it is for any man. If we want to become like our Lord, then we must do what he does. Yea, we must receive of Him the commission to do His work and His will, subduing the flesh. Verily, this is priesthood. But we are commissioned to do the Lord’s work only upon the principle of revelation by and through the unspeakable gift of the Holy Ghost. 
8 Wherefore, because Pharaoh took up again the sin of his fathers, and also of Egyptus, the Lord denied him His commission and he had no right of priesthood. And, though he ruled his people well and was a righteous king, yet he subdued not his own flesh. In this he did also deny the Lord’s commission to his whole generation and his entire nation. 
9 Behold, this is the Gospel of Jesus Christ, that we should all come unto the knowledge of the Son, and unto His wisdom, and His stature as a son of God. Yea, this is the will of the Lord – that all might emerge out of what we now are into that which we must become, if we are to be the sons and daughters of God in more than mere words only. Yea, and the commission of the Lord is priesthood. 
10 He may give unto us authority to convey this gospel to all the world and to confer priesthood upon everyone. But without the commission received by the gift of revelation, the conferring of priesthood is as the sound of a drum, beautiful but not lasting. And when the sound of the drumbeat is gone, what is left of priesthood but memory. 
11 Behold, it is also written of another Noah who was a King among the Nephites. And he did confer priesthoods upon his favorites. And behold, even though they claimed the priesthood and the authority of God, they did commit whoredoms in the sight of the people. 
12 Wherefore, is priesthood in the conferring? Or is it in ordination that the right of priesthood is transmitted unto men? I say unto you, Nay. For there was one among them whom the Lord took to Himself after that he had repented. Yea, unto Alma the Lord did reveal Himself and He did give him His commission. Then had Alma priesthood indeed, not by the word and will of a king, but by the word and will of God. 
13 Observe these two Noahs and remember the instruction. For they being dead do continue to teach us still. 
14 Noah, our father of old, conveyed unto his righteous sons all that he could, but they did receive of the Lord according to their own commitment. Noah could not have bestowed anything upon that son who sinned in his heart. 
15 Noah, the wicked Nephite king conveyed all that he could of his own unto those whom he chose, but they could receive nothing of the Lord because of their lack of commitment to His will. King Noah could bestow nothing lasting and eternal upon any man, though he possessed all the authority of a kingdom. 
16 Oh man! Never think yourself too big. Puff not yourself up in the pride of your heart! Do you think that you can lay hands upon any person and convey unto them that which is not yours to convey? Know that the laying on of hands is only the physical token of the priesthood. But nothing at all is conveyed except by and through the commission received directly from the Peacemaker by personal revelation. 
17 Wherefore, we may perform the ordinances but they are hollow without revelation. Yea, we may preach and teach, but our words are false if we are not on the Lords errand and under His commission. And we may confer upon men the priesthood, but only in empty words and meaningless phrases without the direction of the Lord. And we may wash and anoint, but for what purpose? We are filthy still without the word and will of the Lord. And shall we stand together and declare ourselves the Friends of Christ and that our calling is made sure? Behold, I say unto you, Not without that the Lord Himself does stand up to declare it with us. 


18 All else is dross. Yea, I speak clearly that you might understand clearly. If anyone teaches ought of priesthoods and authorities more than these things, they instruct in vanities. Yea, they utter falsehoods. Their teaching is a Jaguar woven in cloth. 
19 Let not language determine what is priesthood and what is not. Priesthood is not the man. Nay, nor is it his calling or his station. It is the commission of Christ. And if a man has received the commission of Christ and the Holy Ghost confirms, then you may know with a surety that it is done unto him by revelation. And if the commission has been received by revelation, then let that man be ordained, for he possesses priesthood already. Yea, he is a priest unto his God, wherefore, let him be ordained. 
20 And it is according to the words of Christ which we did receive of Him directly when He did visit the Nem in the flesh, that all women have received the commission of the Mother. They too have priesthood already, wherefore, let them be called and ordained by the laying on of hands as a token of their covenant. Let them administer in all things wherein the Holy Ghost does direct. 
21 And behold, they may also receive the commission of the Peacemaker. Yea, and when they do, they are doubly blessed. Let them be administered to with an ordinance, and ordained and sustained and supported in their calling. 
22 Or shall we not all rejoice that the Lord does see fit to visit His people in righteousness? Shall we not raise our voices in thanksgiving and in praise? Shall we not be as happy and satisfied with the word and will of God that calls upon a woman to do His will, even as happy as we find ourselves to discover that He has called upon any man to administer for Him the works of salvation? Shall not both bring joy to us? Does not one testify of the goodness of God as well as the other? 


CHAPTER 14 
1 Now, it has been written in another place that, whereas men receive the priesthood by orders and His commission by the ordinances, women have received already that great gift wherewith the Mother did bless them. But still, even though they are empowered from before the foundation of the world, if they will do the works of the Peacemaker they will also work in His commission under those principles whereby He does govern His creation. 
2 And He has decreed that His creation shall operate upon certain laws and none may circumvent them. Wherefore, there is an order of priesthood given unto men whereby, if they receive the commission of Christ, they may do even the work and will of the Creator of heaven and earth. And if women receive also His commission, they may also do this same work. 
3 And there is an order of the priesthood which is preparatory, the beginning of faith, and another which it fulfills and finishes, the culmination of faith. And the preparatory priesthood is called after Levi, that son of Israel of old. And it is by and through this priesthood that Aaron did minister unto Moses and unto the people. 
4 And behold, the ordinances and covenants of this priesthood have for their purpose to bring the heart and the intention of the man to that point where he may set aside the things of the world and take up spiritual things. Yea, because of the preparation whereby the Lord does prepare the man, through this order of the priesthood, the man is able to lay down the natural man and step out of the telestial world. Indeed, by the ordinances and the covenants of this priesthood, the man may rend the veil that separates him from the Way. 
5 This order of priesthood has for its purpose to prepare and to teach the man to live the Law of the Gospel and of Sacrifice. Yea, it is by this 
________________
order that men take up that more precious part which has been given to all women. Yea, by this order of priesthood does he learn to sacrifice for others and to serve others, placing their needs above his own. Yea, by this priesthood, when he has received the commission of the Creator and Peacemaker, he may move the mountain of his own soul and make a straight path for his spirit. 
6 And the ordinances of the Order of Levi are the teaching and preaching of the peaceable things of the kingdom, baptism, the administration of the emblems of the Lord’s Sacrifice, the purification of the Ammonites, prayer, fasting, and so forth. 
7 And all men who have good intention and who have received through revelation and through the Holy Ghost the commission of God are entitled to seek this right of priesthood. Yea, and they enter into it with a covenant. And this is the nature of the covenant: 
8 Every man who takes up this covenant, having been commissioned and called of God, even as Aaron was called of God, shall come unto one who has also received the Lord’s commission and relate the revelation unto that person. And that person shall take them and lay hands upon them and, saying the person’s name plainly, they shall pronounce a blessing and confer this order of priesthood saying: 
9 By the commission I have received of the Lord, I confer upon you the Priesthood after the Order of Levi. You shall hereafter be known as a priest and teacher of this order and I do this in the name of the Peacemaker. 
10 Now I would that all should take note of how this ordinance is performed. For, the commission of the Lord is always clearly uttered when the order of the priesthood is conferred. And the purpose of the calling is also clearly stated. And when the Spirit has made an end of all that shall be said in the blessing, it is finished in the name of the Lord. 
11 This is the pattern and, though our language may all be different, and even all that must be said in the prayer and the blessing may all be different, yet shall a simple pattern always be followed. This is done so that all creation might know by whose word and by whose commission you speak and by whose word and will you do expect the creation to respond. 
12 Now, when women are called unto this work, the order of this priesthood is not conferred upon them, for they work in the covenant under that which the Mother has already conferred. Wherefore, how may we confer ought else? And behold, does the Lord work against His own mother? Or does He place Himself above Her in anything? I say unto you, He does not. For, He is the same who commanded all people to honor their father and their mother, that their days may long upon the land the Lord their God has given them. Wherefore, how then shall we? Behold, let us emulate the Lord. 
13 But when a woman shall request this priesthood, she shall also go unto one who has already received it and she shall relate how that she has received the commission of the Lord by revelation. Then she shall be taken and she shall be introduced into this order by an ordinance also, except that the Order of Levi shall not be conferred upon her, but she is ordained to that Order. Rather, she is ordained with an ordinance. And that person shall take her and lay hands upon her and, saying her name plainly, shall pronounce a blessing and ordain her unto this priesthood saying: 
14 By the commission I have received of the Lord, I ordain you according to the Order of Levi. You shall hereafter be known as a priest and teacher of this order and I do this in the name of the Peacemaker. 
15 And they who become priests and teachers after this order of priesthood assist the high priest in all things. Yea, they do keep the synagogue and they do teach the people. And they do keep peace in the community, for they work under the commission of the Peacemaker. And it is their work to prepare the hearts of all men and women to make a sacred sacrifice for the sake of all living and for the Lord. 
16 And behold, that order of priesthood which is the finisher and culmination of faith is called the Order of the Son of God. And it is by and through this priesthood that Moses did stand in the presence of the Peacemaker Himself and receive instruction of Him. Yea, it is by this priesthood that the man or the woman, having received the commission of the Lord, may walk upon the Way and be prepared in the spirit. 
17 And behold, the ordinances and c this priesthood have for their purpose to bring the heart and the intention of the man to that point where he may find a perfect stillness, that he might walk upon the Way and be instructed more fully in all good things. Yea, because of the culmination whereby the Lord does finish the man, through this order of the priesthood, the man is able to stand at the very veil of the Celestial World and cast it down. Or, in other words, he is able to discern the veil in himself and rend it from the top thereof even to the bottom thereof, and from the bottom thereof even to the top thereof. Indeed, by the ordinances and the covenants of this priesthood, the man may rend the veil that separates him from the Mother and from the Father. 
18 This order of priesthood has for its purpose to prepare and to teach the man to live the law of the chastity and of consecration. Yea, it is by this order that men are able to become partakers of that endowment of power that only Mothers and Fathers in Heaven may possess. Yea, by this order of priesthood does he learn the nature of creation and the duality of all things – that he is not without the woman and the woman is not with him, in the Lord. Yea, by this priesthood, when he has received the commission of the Creator and Peacemaker, he may learn to act and not be acted upon. 
19 And the ordinances of the Order of the Son of God are the teaching and preaching of the peaceable things of the kingdom, and the ordinances of the High Place. 
20 And all men who have good intention and who have received through revelation and through the Holy Ghost the commission of God are also entitled to seek this right of priesthood. Yea, and they enter into it with a covenant. And this is the nature of the covenant: 
21 Every man who takes up this covenant, having been commissioned and called of God, even as Aaron was called of God, shall come unto one who has also received the Lord’s commission and relate the revelation unto that person, and shall pledge his willingness to serve God all the days of his life. And that person shall take them and lay hands upon them and, saying the person’s name plainly, they shall pronounce a blessing and confer this order of priesthood saying: 
22 By the commission I have received of the Lord, I confer upon you the Priesthood after the Order of the Son of God. You shall hereafter be known as a high priest and Peli of this order and I do this in the name of the Peacemaker. 
23 Now I would that all should also take note of how this ordinance is performed. For, the commission of the Lord is always clearly uttered when the order of the priesthood is conferred. And the purpose of the calling is also clearly stated. And when the Spirit has made an end of all that shall be said in the blessing, it is finished in the name of the Lord. 
24 This is the pattern and, though our language may all be different, and even all that must be said in the prayer and the blessing may all be different, yet shall a simple pattern always be followed. And again, all creation shall know by whose word and by whose commission you speak and by whose word and will you do expect the creation to respond. 
25 Now, when women are called unto this work, the order of this priesthood is not conferred upon them, for they work in the covenant under that which the Mother has already conferred. 
26 But when any woman shall request this priesthood, she shall also go unto one who has already received it and she shall relate how that she has received the commission of the Lord by revelation and that she is determined to serve Him in all things. Then she shall be taken and she shall be introduced into this order by an ordinance also, except that the Order of the Son of God shall not be conferred upon her. Rather, she is ordained unto it with an ordinance. And that person shall take her and lay hands upon her and, saying her name plainly, they shall pronounce a blessing and ordain her unto this priesthood saying: 
27 By the commission I have received of the Lord, I ordain you according to the Order of the Son of God. You shall hereafter be known as a high priest and Peli of this order and I do this in the name of the Peacemaker. 
28 And they who become high priests and Peli after this order of priesthood assist the Lord and the Councils in all things, just as they who become priests and teachers assist the high priests and Peli. Yea, they do keep the High Place and the archives, and they do teach the people. And they also do keep peace in the community, for they too work under the commission of the Peacemaker. And it is their work to prepare the hearts of all men and women to stand in the very presence of the Mother and of the Father and receive of them the fullness. 
29 And they shall not seek this honor, or in other words, they shall not take up to speak and act in the name of the Lord God, unless they have received of Him the commission to do so. Wherefore, if anyone has a desire to serve Him, they are called to the work by Him. And the right of priesthood is that commission which He gives to them who make this covenant. By revelation He does commission them. By revelation He does direct them. Yea, by revelation He does govern His Church. 
30 And behold, let none believe that they possess anything of the Lord merely because they have had hands laid on them and because they have had this order conveyed upon them, or that order conferred. For there is no ordination that has any merit if not by the commission of He who is the author of them. And, if the Peacemaker gives not the commission, let no man or woman think that they have any right to priesthood. 
31 Behold, the Nem do not hold themselves to be more worthy of this honor than any other people. The honor is that the Lord does teach us the manner by which the Universe does function. And the power of the priesthood is a part of it. For all they who do learn to act in this power do exercise great faith upon the matter of creation. And, having the commission of the Creator, the matter does recognize in the voice of His servants that voice which did command them in the beginning. 
32 And being satisfied with that covenant by which they were first brought together, they do combine again to do the work of Him who created the worlds. It is by this power that the Brother of Jared caused mountains to move out of the way, that the people of God might pass by them. 
33 For the voice of the Creator is powerful because it is the voice of faith and of love and the elements do respond to His voice. Wherefore, that servant of the Lord who, having His commission, does speak and act in His name, invokes that first day of creation and once again the matter responds to the voice of the Master. And it is the same today as it was in that very first day, for all things are as one day to the Lord and also to that which He did create. Wherefore, how shall today be any different than in that day when He did command that the elements form themselves and that they should begin to fulfill the covenant that He made with the Father and with the Holy Ghost? And how can we say that the world does differ ought from that moment when the Mother did put the breath of life into all living things? 
34 And this is the thing that the servant of the Lord must understand. For, when His servants do speak and act in His name, the elements obey. Wherefore, it is written, take not the Lord’s name in vain. For the Lord God will not hold you harmless if you take His name in vain. 
35 And if a man, speaking in the name of God, but having not His commission, does bestow upon another the priesthood, what then? Shall there be any priesthood? I say unto you, Nay. 
36 And if a man, acting in the name of Christ, but having not His commission, does prophesy, what then? Shall it become scripture? Again, I say unto you, Nay. 
37 And shall the covenants of God be entered into without His commission? Shall anyone go up to the High Place and there perform the ordinances without that He has made known unto them His will? And, because a man say in his arrogance; This day I have an endowment from the Lord. Shall there be any power in the endowment? Nay! 
38 And shall any man declare to the elements his own election? Shall he testify to the wind, then, that he has made his calling and election sure? Shall a priesthood that he has made of clay convey such power to the sons of men? Do not believe it. 
39 Behold, God will not justify as many as do the same. For behold, He does give His commission to all them that seek it. Yea, every man and every woman who seeks His holy face, shall indeed see it and He shall give unto them an endowment of power such as only heavenly beings possess. 
40 And He shall declare your election. Yea, He shall give unto you the Holy Ghost and all things shall come back to your remembrance. Then shall He testify to the wind that He has made your calling and election sure. Surely, the power of the Creator, yea, even that priesthood given unto him of the Father and the Mother of our spirits, shall convey priesthood to them that seek Him. Behold, this you may believe. 
41 And He shall meet you when you go up to the High Place, if you wait upon His word. Surely, He shall reveal unto you His will and He will instruct you in all things. 
42 And men and women shall speak words of peace as they are moved upon by the Holy Ghost. And their children shall remember the words which they speak to gather them and make them their own. And is this not scripture? 
43 And men and women shall serve their neighbor in all the ordinances of the synagogue and also the High Place and the work they do shall be the Lord’s work, for He shall have instructed them. And when He has given His commission, they shall receive the priesthood after the orders that pertain thereto and according to the purpose of the Lord which pertains thereunto. And with His commission, they shall speak and act in His holy name and He shall justify and remember them and all their works on His behalf. For they shall be His servants and shall He not justify His own? 
44 For you may believe it, the Lord does delight in calling His servants and He does give them power, both pertaining to things of this life and this world, as well as lives and worlds without end. And He rejoices with all they that do take up His work and obey His will. And, seeking His commission, even after that they have received His priesthood and have been ordained unto an holy calling, they shall act and the creation shall react according to that commandment it received of Him so long ago. Yea, they shall act and yet be not acted upon, worlds without end. 
45 And herein is the thing in which Pharaoh did err. Behold, he claimed the right of his fathers to obtain knowledge of all things and sit upon the right hand of God. And he was not an evil man, nay, nor did he exercise evil upon his people. But he did consider that because he was a son of Noah that he could lay claim to that priesthood given to his fathers. But he sought not the commission of the Lord before laying claim to the work of his fathers. 
46 And, because he would not uphold the Law of Chastity, but did justify his grandfather in the thing wherewith he did dishonor unto Noah, it cannot be that he understood the meaning and the significance of the laws and commandments of God. 
47 And having no understanding of such things, he cannot have had the commission of the Lord in the thing that he sought. Wherefore, because of a heritage and a tradition of unrighteousness, he preserved a curse in the land. Yea, he preserved a sore curse. For by the tradition which he did justify, none could come to a knowledge of the ordinances of the High Place, and none could receive the Lord’s commission. Wherefore, he was of a lineage that had not right of priesthood, because he knew not that the right passes not from father unto son because of flesh and blood, but because the work and will of the Lord is in the teaching of the father unto his son. 
48 Yea, Pharaoh believed that, because Noah received his priesthood from his fathers, he ought to possess the same right because of the blood that flowed in him. For Pharaoh was of that same lineage whereby Noah the prophet did trace his generation to Adam our father. 
49 But behold, it is not flesh and it is not blood that conveys this right unto men, but the commission of Him who created us. Wherefore, it is not the blood of Hagoth, nor of Oug, nor of Nephi or Lehi, or Joseph or Jacob, nay, nor even of Abraham or of Adam, that gives right of priesthood. We do not deceive ourselves in this. For, we know that God does delight in speaking unto them that will call upon His name and seek His face. Wherefore, He employs no steward there, but prefers that we come unto him and not unto our forefathers. 
50 Yea, He does entreat us to come unto Him. That He gives unto us the duties and ordinances of the priesthood is certain. But such things are not the priesthood, nay, it does not define it. For in all, such things do only draw our minds to ponder His works, and our hearts to seek communion with Him. Yea, the works and ordinances of the priesthood do place our feet upon a good road, a straight path, and surely we shall see His face and we shall be like Him. But it shall be by walking that road that we do achieve such things. Behold, the ordinances do not save us. It is by living the principles that such things teach us that conveys us into the presence of the Lord. 
CHAPTER 15 
1 Behold, the Nem know unto whom they look for atonement. It is the same today as it was when the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost did gather all living into that great council wherein they did initiate the New and Everlasting Covenant. Yea, we do know that we shall have all things brought to our remembrance by the Holy Ghost, even the Holy Spirit of Promise. And behold, I say again, we do know unto whom we look for exaltation. We do look to our Creator, the Peacemaker, even the Son of God. 
2 And we do also know that should any man, kindred or nation declare unto the world that salvation comes not through Him who is mighty to save, behold, it is a sign unto us that they have left the plan of happiness and the path of truth. Yea, if ever we begin to think of ourselves as saviors in that light, we know to turn ourselves again and repent of the evil which has come into our hearts. 
3 Now, this thing did verily come to pass in Mentina. For there was elevated to the seat of high priest one who was mighty to prophesy. Not long after the controversy was resolved in Mentina over who should stay and who should remove to another place, in order that the people placed not too great a burden upon the land, the high priest whom the people of Mentina had chosen died as all men do. 
4 And they resolved upon another to take unto themselves a certain man to be high priest who was mighty in prophecy. And his name was Tucantor, and he was descended from Hagoth and from Hemen. 
5 And he did walk upon the Way for a time. But behold, he ceased to subject all things unto the confirmation of the Holy Ghost, insomuch that he did begin to interpret every thought that did come into his mind and into his heart as the very word and will of God. And because of this, he did begin to place constraints upon the personal revelation that is the right of every person. 
6 Yea, when he called upon his fellow servants to fill certain stewardships, he did declare unto them that they had no choice in the matter. Or, in other words, he taught them that they ought not to importune the Lord in the matter because that he had already received the word of the Lord. And also he did begin to teach that only the high priest had the keys to prophesy and to receive revelation for and in behalf of the whole nation. Wherefore, the individual had no more right to such things, for the Lord had chosen him to be His Seer. 
7 Now, in this thing he did greatly err. For, the seer is the servant of the Lord. And if he is the Lord’s servant then he must also be the servant of the people. Yet the high priest of Mentina did manifest what he declared to be the will of the Lord unto all the people and he did not invite them to follow, but rather, he demanded obedience of them. Wherefore, he became the taskmaster of all the people. 
8 And this was grievous to the people. For the Lord had taught them that they must come unto Him. But the high priest insisted that they must not importune Him nor weary Him with inquiry. Yea, he even taught the people that to do so, or in other words, to inquire of the Lord concerning any matter upon which the high priest had already spoken, was to take the Lord’s name in vain. 
9 And behold, this teaching did go about the country and there were some of the high priests in other cities and settlements that took it up also. Yea, and even some of the priests and the teachers did also take it up. To the extent that a division developed among the people. 
10 And the people of my city did come unto me and they did inquire of me my opinion of the doctrine, saying; 
11 What think you of this new doctrine which the high priest of Mentina does preach concerning importuning the Lord in all things? For, he does teach us that we ought not to seek the confirmation of the Holy Ghost in all things, but that in all matters upon which our leaders have already spoken, we should leave well enough alone. For, if we importune the Lord, yea, if we weary Him, do we not endanger our own salvation? 
12 And I answered them saying; 
13 This doctrine is false. Let us go up even unto Mentina and inquire of the high priest concerning it. For it is my understanding that the Lord has I do not recall where He has admonished us to pray unto the high priest. Wherefore, let us go up even unto Mentina and see what this high priest will say. 
14 And we did make a delegation and we did travel up even unto Mentina. And we did arrive in the middle of the day and the high priest and all them that he had called to assist him had gone up into the temple to worship. And behold, when we came nigh unto the temple, behold, one of his servants did come forth and declare unto us that the high priest was at private service in the temple and we could not go in unto him. 
15 Now, this was a curious thing indeed. For, have our forefathers not taught that the temple is the High Place of the Lord and that none should ever be prevented from going in unto it? I say unto you, This is the custom of the High Place of the Lord. 
16 Wherefore, I did beat upon the door of the temple or lodge of Adam to find the high priest there. And I found him not. Whereupon, we did pass through. And we did beat upon the doors of all the lodges of the temple until we had ascended the hill even unto the temple of Eve and the door thereof. 
17 And when I did beat upon the door, a servant did come out unto us and addressed us, saying; 
18 What is the cause of this noise that you make in the holy place? Have you no reverence for the temple of God or of His priesthood? 
19 And I did answer him. And these are the words with which I did make my response; 
20 How is it that the doors to the temple of Eve stand closed to her children? Has this ever been? Or when have the doors of the High Place become a bulwark to prevent entrance to the righteous? 
21 And the man did answer me, saying; 
22 Behold, Moroni, if you were truly the righteous as you say, you would not come up to the High Place bellowing like a bull. Those within are worshiping in reverence. Be still and disturb them not! 
23 And these words did sting me to the center, and I did answer him, saying; 
24 I come to make a joyful sound with my brother the high priest. Or is the worship of the high priest become so reverent that there is no joy to be found in the High Place under his stewardship? How is it that the high priest does go into the High Place and lock the doors behind him? When did the ordinances and the observance of them become private worship? 
25 And the man, whose name was Shan Rayin, did answer me, saying; 
26 Behold, the high priest did receive of the Lord a revelation and did give him new ordinances to be performed herein. And only those called of God by the mouth of the high priest of Mentina, who is the seer and prophet of God, may go up into the High Place. For the Lord has always given the management of the High Place and of the Archives into the hands of the high priest. Wherefore, his are the keys of this priesthood and none possess them but him in this generation. Wherefore, do not come up from out of your waste place, your refuge, and seek to order the house of God. 
27 Now behold, these words did kindle in me a wrath which I had not felt since the Nephite war, and I did pass by Sha Rayin and I did stand forth and cast down the door of the temple of Eve. And when I had cast down the door, I did set it gently against the wall thereof, that none might think that I lacked reverence for the house of my mother. But behold, I did pass into the lodge to confront the high priest. 
28 But, before I could stand forth to make my inquiry of him, behold we were set upon by armed men and we were forced to retreat from out of the High Place altogether, for we were not accustomed to carrying arms in the holy place. And these armed men did stand forth to prevent any conversation with the high priest. 
29 Wherefore, I did take the delegation and we did assemble in the place of Counsel. Yea, and we did call upon and summon the Council to hear our grievance. But behold, the clerk of the Council did inform us that by a revelation received of the high priest, the Council of Mentina had been dissolved and done away. Wherefore, there was none to hear our complaint. 
30 Now, all this had been done in the city of Mentina by word of revelation received by the high priest. And it was done quickly and under arms was it accomplished. Yea, and so quickly was this done that none yet knew of it even within most precincts of the city. So quickly had this man done this wickedness that the people themselves were hardly aware of it. And he had done it under guise of priesthood. 
31 And we did voice the news abroad in the city, that all might know of it. And a multitude did gather to hear the rumor, scarcely believing that such a thing could come to pass in Mentina. And when we had related to the multitude what had taken place amongst their fair city, they believed us not at all. Wherefore, we did entreat them to go even up to the High Place and see for themselves if there were not armed men at the gate thereof to bar the way before them. 
32 And they did return unto us and they did testify unto the multitude that our words were spoken in truth. Yea, they did testify unto all the people that the high priest had set armed men at the gate of the High Place to bar the way to any who had not received of him a new priesthood. 
33 Then were the people outraged and they all went straightway up to the temple to see the thing for themselves. And behold, when the guards saw the number of the people approaching them, that it was great, they cast down their weapons and begged the crowd to hear them, saying; 
34 Behold, men and women of Mentina, put this thing not upon us. For did you not raise up to yourselves this high priest? And is he not a man great in prophecy and in visions? Wherefore, he did command us in accordance with his stewardship over this house. And are we able to judge our master? 
35 And with these words they did placate the mob. For behold, never before was such a thing seen in Mentina. Yea, never before had the doors of the High Place been shut to any person. And never before had a high priest ever sought to usurp the rights of the people and subvert the ways of the Lord. And their anger was hot. 
36 And they did place me at the head of the mob and we did pass through even up the hill to the door of the temple of Eve, and we did enter therein and found the high priest kneeling before an altar of stone cut by the hand of man, yea, with steps leading up to it, which he had caused to be raised up in that holy place. 
37 And when he did perceive that his guards had not kept the people from his private worship, he stood before us and was wroth. And surely he did speak to us with hard words, saying; 
38 What is this evil? How do you come up to this holy place, yea, even into the sanctuary of the High Place to disturb my worship? 
39 And I did answer him, saying; 
40 Behold, I am Moroni, the same who was high priest in this place, but am now high priest of Elak Kowa. I came up into this place with that same spirit and countenance with which I have ever approached the High Place. But behold, I was met with locked doors and armed men. What have you been doing here? 
41 And he answered me, saying; 
42 Go back to Elak Kowa, Moroni. Go back even unto your own city and rule it as you see fit. The Lord has chosen me to be prophet of Mentina and has given me priesthood and authority. Wherefore, seek not to circumvent the Lord or His prophet. 
43 And I answered him, saying; 
44 I will of a surety go back to my own home, Tucantor, but not before you have answered my questions. For I esteem that the high priest of Mentina is a duty and a stewardship of some import to us all. Wherefore, when strange news came even unto me in my own city, I determined that I ought to withhold judgment until I had spoken unto you concerning the thing. 
45 For behold, Tucantor, I believed not that such stories as were told to me could be true. For, I was told of the undoing of all that the Nem have stood for over the course of all the generations since we left the Land Southward. But I could not believe that such a thing could have been done by one chosen by the people to safeguard even that which is most precious to us. 
46 Wherefore, I shall leave and return unto my own place in good and due course. But before I do, you shall surely answer me my inquiry. 
47 And Tucantor puffed himself up in his pride and he answered me, saying; 
48 Of a truth, Moroni, you shall ask your questions. But I say unto you, I shall answer only that which pleases me. For I have received the keys of the kingdom and do not answer to you. Wherefore, make your inquiry. 
49 And I did reason with him; 
50 I have been told that you have decreed that the Lord makes known His mystery and His will to you through revelation. 
51 That is correct, Moroni. The Lord has revealed to me His order. Yea, I have received under the hand of His servant, even an angel of the Lord, that order of priesthood whereby He shall govern His people in righteousness. 
52 And I answered unto him; That is well Tucantor. Surely the Lord shall give His commission unto whom He will, for it is His alone to give. 
53 You speak the truth, Moroni. The Lord does give of His authority sparingly. And by the word of His angel He has given the keys of His authority unto me. 
54 And again I answered him saying; 
55 How may one know of a surety that what you say is true? How may I know beyond the doubting in my heart that you are truly the anointed of God and that I may follow all your words with confidence? Is there not some way in which the Lord might appease my anxiety? 
56 And Tucantor did answer me, saying; 
57 Do not trifle with the things of the Lord, Moroni. Nay, make not a plaything of the word and will of Him whose voice is like a two-edged sword. For to play upon His words is to take up the sword not by the hilt, but by the blade. Wherefore, have a care. 
58 Surely, what you say is true, Tucantor. But I am just a man. How may a mere man know the truth of what you say? How may I test your prophecy? 
59 And Tucantor answered me, saying; 
60 You cannot. You must obey. The Lord will reveal what He will and you shall have no complaint. And the Lord shall reveal His secrets unto whom He will and again you shall have no complaint. 
61 And I answered him; You are mistaken, Tucantor. For the Lord has taught us and we have all that He has revealed unto His prophets. And has He not entreated us to subject all things unto the confirmation of the Holy Ghost? Has He not taught that the Holy Ghost shall be a comforter unto us? And shall the Holy Ghost no longer bring anything to our remembrance because you have seen an angel? 
62 And you declare that there shall be but one prophet. Is this a sound doctrine? Is this how the Lord has treated with His people? Shall we throw out all the scriptures because you have seen an angel? Shall we give over our responsibility to test all things, yea, and prove all things by the Holy Ghost because you are a man with gifts? 
63 And hearing this, the high priest was wroth and he spoke harshly unto me and unto all the multitude. And the rumor of his words went out unto all the people. 
64 Moroni, you are mistaken. We live in different times. Do not judge the Lord your God. Surely, if He desires to work differently today than He did in generations past, what is this to you. Will you dictate to the Lord how He shall do this, or will you regulate the Lord in how He shall do that? 
65 And I answered him, saying; 
66 I do not begrudge the Lord anything. Nay, I would not seek to judge my God. Let Him do according to His word and will. For, His ways are always good and just. And if He has given you a new revelation which does illuminate His word and His will for us in our day, I am well. I shall follow your revelation. Yea, I shall bow to your prophecy, if the Holy Ghost does testify and witness unto me the truth of it. 
67 For, behold I say unto you Tucantor, there is more than one God in the Heavens with whom we have to do. Yea, there is the Father and the Mother. And there is the Son. And there is the Holy Ghost. And there are many Heavenly Beings. And I know that they are separate beings, yet their purpose is one. And they did enter into a covenant with each other to bring about this world and this creation. 
68 Wherefore, the Lord has taught that He shall surely reveal His secrets unto His servants the prophets. But behold, He has also taught that we must submit all His words and revelations unto the confirmation of the Holy Ghost. 
69 Verily, he has taught that it is by the power of the Holy Ghost that we shall test all things. Yea, it is by the gift of the Holy Ghost that we shall prove all things. And it is by the unspeakable gift of the Holy Ghost that all things shall be made know, yea, all things shall become written in us as upon a book. 
70 But behold, you have declared that to test your words by this great gift shall be accounted unto us as sin and for unrighteousness. Yea, you have condemned us for importuning the Lord, saying that we must not seek a confirmation of anything that has already been spoken by the prophet of God. 
71 But I ask you, what shall we do with all that has been spoken by his prophets before you? If you are truly the prophet of God in our day, and if you possess the keys of the priesthood and of the kingdom, then do you also suggest that the archives be broken and the records be burned and melted down? Yea, shall we throw out the revelations of God to His prophets because you have seen an angel? Is this truly the will of the Lord? 
72 And what shall they do who walk upon the Way and speak with angels daily? Have the angels locked the doors that give upon the Way as you have locked the doors of the temple? Or does God no longer wish His children to come unto Him. Does He have no time for us now? Does He no longer welcome us into His presence? And if this is so, then what is the purpose of this existence? Shall you do away with the very creation because you have seen an angel? 
73 You declare that the Lord has conferred upon you a new order of priesthood and you deny the High Place and the ordinances thereof to all but they whom you authorize with this order. But tell me, Tucantor, have you received His commission? 
74 And Tucantor answered me, saying; 
75 Behold, as I sat in the temple, an angel appeared to me and taught me concerning the ways of the Lord. And he did teach me that we have all been misled. Yea, we have been all these generations bound up in error. For, we have believed a doctrine that has gone contrary to the gospel as it was given unto our fathers. Yea, we have left the path of truth to go down a road that leads into oblivion. 
76 Set aside all that you have learned of men and listen to me, for I speak the words of God. There is one authority given of heaven whereby the ordinances of salvation may be delivered unto the children of men. And this authority is the priesthood. By it and through it men speak and act in the name of God and only in this way may we avail ourselves of the ordinances and performances required by the Lord for salvation’s sake. Surely, He will not admit anyone into His kingdom who has not received the ordinances of the priesthood. 
77 And He has revealed through this same angel that, although many men might possess this authority, they shall nevertheless be governed by that one in whom the Lord shall invest the keys thereof. And none shall have more authority than the anointed of God. Wherefore, it is reasonable that when the prophet of God shall receive a doctrine by revelation, he is not to be questioned in it, neither by men, nor by spirit. 
78 For, the gifts of the Spirit are good and they are useful, but they do not supersede the priesthood. And shall one man have a gift and do away with the authority given to the anointed of God? I say unto you, Nay, for this is confusion. Yet have we been confused all these generations. For, we have been taught that even Christ Himself may not speak without our rushing out to test His words by this Holy Ghost. And shall the Holy Ghost, which is but a spirit, possess more authority than God, who is both body and spirit? 
79 And shall one man’s gift overcome another’s. It has been revealed unto me that one man may have a gift and it may only be useful until it seeks to make conquest of the power and authority of the priesthood. And this priesthood God gives in orders and He sets apart His chosen to govern it on earth, even as He governs it in heaven. And behold, at the head of the orders of the priesthood, God places His anointed. For, God’s house is a house of order and there is no confusion in it. 
80 Now, it is certain that they who act against the word and will of God, as it is revealed by Him to His servants the prophets, shall not enjoy the same blessings as they who obey His commandments. And surely, they shall not go up into the House of the Lord if they will not obey His commandments. Wherefore, it has been revealed unto me by the angel that only they who have proven themselves loyal to the commandments of God ought to enter into the holy halls of His home. It is to keep out the filthiness of the world that the doors of the High Place are closed to all but the righteous. 
81 Wherefore, you were mistaken Moroni when you said that the doors of the temple were unjustly barred before you. For, they are only locked to those who lack authority to go up thither. And did you come unto the high priest of this city to seek this priesthood? I say unto you Nay. The word and the will of God is not important to you. But you did come straight up unto the High Place as if it was your own house to do with as you will. 
82 And behold, you lied when you said that armed men assailed you. For, it is you who assailed the House of God. Those servants of the Lord whom He placed to guard the High Place intended no injury upon you, but can you claim the same? I say unto you, Nay. You came to do harm and injury upon the Lord in His own house. Do not judge the servants of the Lord for their loyalty and for their desire to preserve that which is precious. 
83 And after this manner did the high priest of Mentina speak in the temple of Eve where we found him. And the people were all struck dumb, not by any power of heaven or of earth, but by amazement. For, never had they heard such doctrine. But they had allowed this to take place in their own city and right under their own eaves. Wherefore, they were amazed at the words of their high priest. 
84 And there was one man whose name was Micah, and he cried out to the people, saying; 
85 Let us call upon the Council of the City to hear this matter. For surely these are strange doctrines and not like anything that we have heard or been taught. 
86 And I answered him, saying; 
87 A good thought. Yea, that would be right, according to the laws and traditions of the people of this city. But behold, the high priest has released the Council and has not called for a new one. Who then shall hear the case? 
88 And the people cried out in one voice, yea, the common voice of the people was heard on the Mountain of the Lord’s House and it echoed down the streets and alleyways of Mentina. And they cried out in one accord that they did not sustain the high priest. 
89 And they took him and stripped him of the shawl and removed from him the seat of high priest. And he walked through the midst of them in his pride even unto his own house. And when he had reached his own house he did turn again and address the people, saying; 
90 Behold, I am still high priest in this city. For, I did receive the anointing of God. I did not become high priest upon your appointment, but under the hands of an angel. Wherefore, how can you think to remove from me what has been given by God? And behold, they who remain loyal to me shall labor under my direction day by day until I sit once again to judge this city and its people. Wherefore, think not that by the common consent of this people that I have lost ought because of you. 
91 And none of the ordinances performed for any reason by any person in this city, nay, behold by anyone in the whole land, shall be acceptable to the Lord until the people do uphold the right by which they seek to act in His holy name. And when they do that, He will once again accept their sacrifice. Until then, you shall all labor under the condemnation of God, a condemnation which shall not be lifted by the common consent of the wicked. 
92 And he went within his house and was high priest no more. 


CHAPTER 16 
1 Now, this event did disturb the people greatly. For they had always thought that the high priest did act in accordance with that which is confirmed by the Holy Ghost. And it did seem that this high priest did speak contrary to that confirmation. Yea, even he did speak in contradiction of those things which the Lord Himself did teach when He visited our forefathers. 
2 But there was some truth in his words. For, the Lord did give the orders of the priesthood to be a means whereby men might learn to do the things that He does. And also, He did give the priesthood that men and women might learn to serve one another. 
3 But He did by no means teach that the priesthood is the font of salvation. For the Holy Ghost is that holy being by whose power we may know the truth and have a remembrance of all things. And also that same Holy Ghost does seal up the righteous unto Christ. Wherefore, He is called the Holy Spirit of Promise and it is by this sealing that we may come unto Christ and become His. For, the Peacemaker is the font of our salvation. 
4 And behold, we know that this is the work and the purpose of priesthood. Yea, it is to bring men and women unto the Peacemaker and to be sealed up His. Wherefore, heaven and earth may pass away, yet shall all that is His stand forever. And therefore, if we are His, then when the earth does flee and the heavens melt away, yet shall we stand in our lot and live. 
5 But Tucantor would have it believed that this same Holy Ghost is secondary to the priesthood and that His purpose is not as has been taught by prophets and by God Himself. Yea, he would have us all believe that the power of the priesthood supersedes that unspeakable gift of the Holy Ghost and that we ought not have the right to seek a confirmation of the truth of all things. 
6 But this is contrary to the work and the will of God. For, are we not taught that we must seek His face? And how shall we know of a surety that God even exists? Shall Tucantor declare and all simply believe? Is this sufficient? I say unto you, Nay. 
7 Behold, I do believe that the land of Jerusalem, from whence came our forefathers, does truly exist far away to the West. But I have never stepped upon that land. Nay, I cannot testify of my own knowledge that Jerusalem is real and that in that city there yet stands one stone upon another. Indeed, how may I do it? For, unless I see the city with my own eyes, I cannot testify anything about it. 
8 But behold, I can and do testify of the existence and the divinity of my Lord, yea, even every day of my life. And how may this be done unless I have seen Him with my own eyes? Behold, by the power of the Holy Ghost has the truth of the identity and the character of God been made known to me. 
9 Does the high priest make a thing so simply by declaring it? Or does God exist because the high priest declares it? I say unto you, Nay. Behold, the high priest may only testify of what he knows by and through the gift of the Holy Ghost which is in him and then invite others to seek that same confirmation. 
10 But, if I receive not the same confirmation as the high priest, shall I be condemned as a sinner? Believe it not. Or shall I be cast out from among the people because I receive not the same confirmation as the high priest? I say unto you, Nay. Or is it the high priest unto whom I must come to obtain a remission of my sins? Or is it unto the high priest that I must seek to be sealed? 
11 Behold, the people of Mentina took from Tucantor the mantle of high priest of the city, but can they remove from him to be known as Peli and high priest? Not at all. It is verily so, he does not agree with the voice or common consent of the people, but that does not make him a sinner or miscreant. The intent of his heart shall continue to define him. 
12 Behold, the priesthood of God is a tool for him and through it we may work to perfect ourselves and better our lives through service to our fellow beings. I am not given to be high priest in the city of Elak Kowa because I am perfect already. Nay! But rather, I am called up by my people to serve them in all things, and in this way I am edified. Yea, in this thing I am given a means whereby I might to do more for my neighbor than I might have otherwise been able to do. 
13 And behold, I am high priest to my city. Does this give me authority to do more than my calling allows? Yea, does this give me authority to order the lives of my neighbors? To say unto them, you must do this or you must do that. And behold, if you do not this or that, you shall not be blessed of the Lord? Does the high priest, or any office of the priesthood, give anyone the right or authority to declare worthiness, or to withhold ordinances? Is the priesthood mighty to save, or is it the priesthood that which brings salvation? I say unto, it is not. And does the priesthood convey dominion over anything? I say unto you, It does not. 


CHAPTER 17 
1 And behold, the people met again in council to choose someone to sit in the seat of the high priest of Mentina, and they deliberated long on the matter. And when they had fasted and prayed, behold, they cast the lot upon Minoet, the daughter of Shedet. 
2 And Minoet called a Council of the Peli of the city of Mentina for the purpose of making a regulation of the church. And she counseled them to find out the will of the Lord by revelation, and also the will of the people, as to how the church ought to be managed. 
3 And she did also search the archives and made a record of all the ordinances and ceremonies then in use by the Nem to make plain who was to administer them and how they were to be administered. And she did request of the people that they inquire of the Lord in all things, that the people might once again be brought into unity. 
4 And these are the ordinances that are being administered to the Nem at this time. And I do include them in my record. 
5 Behold, the Ordinance of the Blessing of the Newborn Children, or Unchi-Im, is made by the parents of the child, or one from among the family or friends of the child who has been designated to act in the office of Peli for them. And this ordinance is not a saving grace, but is a tradition and a custom among the Nem. 
6 And the Ordinance of the Blessing of Children, or Unchi-Aht, is made as often as the parents deem necessary and it is done by the parents or the Peli. And this ordinance is not a saving grace, but is a good tradition and a custom of the Nem. 
7 And when a young person has received a remission of their sins, they are baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And this ordinance is made by the parent or the Peli. And this baptism is called Unchi Ahm Aht Ahm, and it is a saving grace. By it we do betoken that we have become in all ways the Lord’s and that He has washed us clean of all iniquity. Wherefore, let all people repent and be baptized. And the young person is straightly charged to receive the Holy Ghost. 
8 And when a person wishes to renew any good thing and continue clean in the eyes of the Lord, they participate in the Unipi and the Itsipi after the manner of the Ammonites (ordinances of the Sweat Lodge). And the Peli shall perform the ordinances as dictated by the Holy Ghost. And this is a saving grace, but it is not required for all people. 
9 And at any time that a new thing is confirmed, they do repeat the Unchi Ahm Aht Ahm. And this is done by the family and in the company of friends to demonstrate with an ordinance and a token every new emergence out of the natural state of man. 
10 And when a person has received the commission of the Lord by revelation, and reports the same unto their parent, they are made Peli. And this is done by the laying on of hands. If the person is a young man, this priesthood is conferred upon him and he receives a blessing and an ordination. If the person is a young woman, she receives a blessing and an ordination. And this priesthood is the Order of Levi and it is received by all who shall perform public ordinances, but behold, it is not a saving grace. Nevertheless, the Lord has given it and He desires that it be done in this manner. 
11 And when any person is called up to do a public service unto the people, behold the Peli does take that person and, laying hands upon them, gives a blessing and an ordination to the calling. And this is done in public or in private, and all the people sustain the calling. 
12 And the people meet often to participate in the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper, which they do call Manna. And it is an ordinance that is made by the Peli, as the scriptures do instruct and according to the guidance and the direction of the Holy Ghost. And behold, it is a saving grace, wherefore, the people do meet together often to receive of it. 
13 And the people also make this ordinance in their homes. And when the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper is made in the home, they seek the commission of the Lord in it each time. 
14 And when a new house or public building is constructed, the Peli does pronounce a blessing upon the place to make it holy ground. And this is done by the direction of the Holy Ghost, but it is not a saving grace. 
15 And when a field is broken, the same is done as for a new house. And also when a field is harvested, the same is done. 
16 And the priests and the Peli do offer up a sacred smoke of incense, and the people do this also as families. Yea, and even as individuals, we do offer up a sweet smoke and a sweet smell unto the Lord. And this we do with all our prayers and in all our oblations and ordinances. And this semblance of the ancient temple of our fathers we do preserve in honor of all those whose prayers have risen up unto heaven in our behalf. But it is not a saving grace and is not required for salvation’s sake. Notwithstanding, we make this offering out of the honor that we feel for the sacrifices of those who have gone before us and for the gifts that they passed on to us. 
17 Now, the ordinances of the High Place are administered to the people through the office of the high priest and all the ordinances are made by the Peli. And the high priest shall manage the affairs of the temple so that all might go there freely and receive of the ordinances. And these ordinances are a saving grace, wherefore, all the people do go up to the High Place and receive of them. 
18 And the high priest may call men and women to be priests and teachers. And when this is done, they are taken aside and hands are laid upon them, and they are ordained unto these callings. 
19 And behold, the Peli do choose a Council of thirteen from among them and they do confer upon them the Priesthood of Melchizedek , even after the pattern given by the Lord. And they do this upon receiving the commission of the Lord by revelation. And in this way, the council that He appointed is preserved. And behold, it is out of this council that the people do choose and call up their high priests. And behold, every city does this same thing. 
20 And when a man is called up to this council, he is taken aside by the whole council and this priesthood is conferred upon the man and he is ordained a high priest by the laying on of hands. And when a woman is called up to this council, she is also taken aside by the council and she is ordained a high priest by the laying on of hands. But behold, this order of priesthood is not conferred upon her, for she has it already of the Mother. Wherefore, how may we confer it? 
21 And behold, the people choose from among this council who shall be high priest of the city. And, upon the election, the council does take the one elected, be they man or woman, and they do lay hands upon the elected and ordain them high priest of the city. 
22 Now, these are the ordinances of the priesthood, and they are for the edification of the people. 


CHAPTER 18 
1 And under the direction of the high priest, the people made a regulation of the church and of their religion. But behold, they required no man or woman to comply with their directives as Tucantor did, but all were invited to seek a confirmation of the truth for themselves. 
2 And behold, if any person received not the same confirmation as the rest of the people, they were not punished or shunned. But because all the people were admonished to receive the Holy Ghost in all things, and also the direct commission of the Lord, the influence of those who would control the people or take authority over them was made the lesser of their concerns. 
3 But when a person broke the laws of the city, they were dealt with according as the people did dictate. And this was done to insure the peace, but never as a means of demanding that one person believe the same as any other. 
4 And behold, there were those who continued to believe the teachings of Tucantor and this did create a division among the people. But such division was not against the law of the people and, even though Tucantor would have taken the control of the entire city, his followers were still considered part of the community and their vote had as much weight as any others. 
5 And Tucantor took some few of his followers and they did request of the council a piece of land on the which to build a synagogue. And the council did grant the land and they did build. And the followers of Tucantor worshiped God after their own conscience and most ways their worship did resemble the ways of the Nem, except that the priesthood was elevated in an extreme manner and almost they did appear to worship the high priest and extol him instead of God. And the priesthood and all public service was withheld from all women. 
6 But behold, they were full of charity and good works, and they did speak peaceably to all the people. And they did teach baptism with water and also the purification of the Ammonites. And they did marry and were given in marriage. Yea, in all ways they did resemble the Nem and they did do the things the Nem did, except in the power and authority they rendered unto the priesthood, and also in the manner in which they did subjugate women. 
7 And the more part of their beliefs did appear well to the people and they did allow them all freedom to act and be acted upon in the city, just as they did any other citizen. But behold, among the followers of Tucantor, there were those who had much, in terms of spiritual things, and there were those who had less. And behold, among them there were even those unto whom the ordinances and the gifts were withheld because they were deemed unworthy by the high priest. Wherefore, there were divisions among them and hard feelings and harsh words, and this thing was seen by the council of Mentina and by the Peli as troubling, and they watched them silently.
8 But the city and its citizens did prosper, as did all the cities and settlements in the land, with the exception of certain cities away down in the south by the gulf of the sea. In some of these cities there was division and unrest. For some of the people there had ceased to give of their surplus and began to heap up their substance as in days of old.
9 And this thing was because of the remnant of the Gadiantons left in that region after the Great War. And they did pervert the ways of the Nem.
10 But in the northern regions and in the mountains, the ways of the Nem continued unchanged and the people did prosper and grow. And behold, they did also prosper in the things of the Spirit. For they did seek the face of Christ and the confirmation of the Holy Ghost. Wherefore, in their daily walk and their daily talk, they did seek the sacred and they were highly favored of the Lord.
11 And in my own city there was peace. Yea, in all the remainder of my life, I saw no reason to grieve or to hasten away to settle any conflict at all. The people of Elak Kowa needed little admonition to seek their God and this was a great comfort to me.
12 And behold, I became old, having lived well past the age of a tree. And I began to feel my Lord call me. Yea, I began to feel that He would call me home. Wherefore behold, I did beg the people to call another to sit in the seat of the high priest in my stead. But they would not, preferring that I ought to be high priest to them until the day that I should be taken from among them. 
13 And I do finish my record. For I do believe that I shall surely lay down my life soon. Yea, I shall go unto my grandfathers and enter into that rest of the Lord that He does promise unto them who love Him.
14 For I do love the Lord with all my heart. And with all my might I do worship Him. Yea, He is my wellspring, and the bread of my life. He has promised that I might be filled with His love and, behold, He has done it. Yea, He has promised that I might have His light and, behold, I do walk daily in that light.
15 Behold, I have been blessed beyond all that I had thought possible. Yea, I have been blessed greatly. I have bound myself to a daughter of God and we have seen His face together.
16 Our children do honor us and do us honor in all their walk and talk. Yea, in all that they have done, they have given us cause only to praise our God in them. Surely, our children are a blessing unto us.
17 And behold, we have prospered in every good thing that we have undertaken. Yea, our crops do grow and our beasts multiply. Our work has been hard and sometimes we have been greatly burdened. But, with every burden under which we have bowed our backs, giving thanks unto God, behold, He has blessed us and succored us.
18 And behold, has He hid His face from us? I say unto you, Nay! He has led us into His presence. And it is a great blessing to us that He does not require us to wait until the day of our death to come unto Him, and a great blessing that we may approach Him even in our bodies. For behold, He has prepared the Way before us and we do make good use of it.
19 And this is the key to our prosperity, our success, and our happiness. For is it possible that we could have been so prosperous and happy without His presence in our lives? It may be possible that we might have succeeded in the wilderness, but could we claim such happiness? Or can anyone say that greater happiness can be achieved than that the Lord should prepare all things before them? Nay, but we have been blessed and prospered because of the goodness of our God.
20 For the world is a wilderness and we are lost in it without the Lord. Yea, we do walk alone in darkness, hoping to find truth and health, and hoping to be able to provide for our needs. And the sun does rise upon us each day, but so also does it rise upon our enemies. Lone and dangerous is the world and filled with calamity.
21 Yea, the world is full of war and of rumor of evil and without the love of God we would be as the beasts of the field and of the mountains. For, surely He does love them also, but they are left to make their way in the wild. Behold, short and bitter is the life of the wild animal, and so too would be the life of man if it were not for the Lord and His grace.
22 For behold, because of Him we may become more than we are. Yea, because of His atonement, we may hope to emerge from darkness into the light of the day of His grace. Yea, and we have hope that our lives may account for a greater thing and a greater work. Behold, we may arise out of this darkness into a blessed state of happiness.
23 And behold, He has provided that this life might be a type of the life that we shall enjoy hereafter. Yea, even in the midst of darkness, yet may we walk upon the Way with Him and see His face. And behold, walking with Him and in His way, we may be instructed in all things and emerge, putting down this clay and taking up great glory and exaltation.
24 We shall not remain as we are but shall become even as He is. And if we are perfected in all things, then are we not made as the Father? Then are we not become as the Mother? And is this not a greater thing than we could ever imagine? Yea, is this not a blessing?
25 For it is beyond hope that we could have overcome our natures without the assistance of Him who overcame all things. Yea, it is beyond hope that we could have, in this carnal, put away all carnality. Behold, it is beyond hope that we could have arisen with our mortality into immortality. Great is God and holy, for He has provided for us a way out of darkness.
26 And behold, we shall rise into immortality and eternal life. Yea, because of His atonement, we shall cast aside all that is beastly. The night of our tribulation shall bring again the dawning of His glory in us. And we shall learn war no more. Surely, our swords shall we make into plowshares, and our spears into pruning hooks. And the science of war we shall teach no more unto our children. For the Lord is our vanguard and our rearguard. Yea, He shall go before us and we are girded up in His love.
27 Behold, the Lord is our foundation and our sure wall. He is the buttress that does protect us from the forces of the world. He has revealed Himself to us and does not hide His face from us. We do live in His presence and He does instruct us.
28 And we do come into His presence and He does make His abode with us. Surely, there can be no greater blessing from heaven than that we do walk and talk with the Lord our God. For, what calamity can compare and what tribulation can make conquest of that peace which comes only from the presence of God?
29 And His yoke is not heavy. We are not bowed down by His commandments. His doctrine is simple and it is easy to live. We are edified by His spirit and the Holy Ghost is our constant companion. There is no want in our souls and we do hunger and thirst, but not for bread and wine, for of these things we have plenty. But we do hunger and thirst after righteousness because the Lord is with us. 
30 Behold we do honor the Lord in all things, remembering Him and His sacrifice for us. He has taken us into His household and we are His children. Yea, we do sit at the feet of our Lord and we do learn wisdom, even as a little child does sit at the feet of his grandfather or his grandmother and learn wisdom. Such is our Lord unto us. 
31 Yea, the Nem have been blessed beyond measure. And this is also a blessing unto me, for I am Nem also. And in all that the Nem are blessed and prospered, I do esteem it blessing and prosperity unto myself.
32 And even in my rememberings, of a life long past, which are full of grievous things, yet I do rejoice in my Lord. For all of my sufferings have become joy and all of my pain also. And that field of blood and crimson which I thought was all that I had left in my stead, by which the world must surely have remembered me, He has turned up and made of it as a field of white. Surely, I am the most blessed of men.
33 Wherefore, I do give up this stylus and also all my tools unto my son, Shioni, and I go unto that rest which my Lord shall provide for me. Amen.
________________




THE BOOK OF SHIONI 
THE SON OF MORONI 


CHAPTER 1 
Moroni dies ninety-two years after the end of the Great War. A division among the Nem people between the teachings of Tucantor, and Moroni and the revelations of the Spirit. Shioni writes the words of his father, Moroni, as given in the. High Place 
1 In the ninety and second year from the ending of the Great War between the Nephites and the Lamanites, Moroni gave up the ghost and was laid down to rest with his forefathers. 
2 And he did serve as high priest to his people in all those years, either in the city of Mentina or in his own city. And behold, he did govern the house of the Lord in righteousness. Yea, and he did steward the records of his people and care for them. 
3 But this is not all, for he did many great and noble works during the days of his probation which he did not write about himself. For he was a man of great opinion and confidence, having been trained from his youth to be a leader of men. Nevertheless, he did strive all the days of his life to bend in himself his own arrogance, that he became not puffed up in pride. Yea, he did practice humility in the days of his life and he did earnestly work to nurture kindness in his heart, against the teachings of his youth. 
4 For behold, Moroni was a man of war. Yea, of a necessity, he was brought up in war and he was trained for war. In all the making of the tools of war he was expert and in their use there could be no greater master. Wherefore, even from his youth he was destined to be a captain, even a great general, in the armies of the Nephites. And behold, he did attain to the leadership of their armies, not because he was the son of Mormon, but because he was more accomplished in the workings of war than any other man. And because of this he was elevated rapidly in rank, so that, when his father was killed in battle, he was made ruler over the armies of the Nephites in their final struggle. 
5 Now, can you see the conflict that this experience might create in the heart of Moroni? This was the thing that he was to carry all the days of his life. For, the Nephites prevailed not. And the knowledge of Moroni did not prevail. All the workings of war and the machinations of battle availed the Nephites nothing in the end. Neither did such things afford any advantage to my father when the struggle with the Lamanites ended in disaster. And this thing did my father carry with him for the rest of his life, and it was a struggle for him. 
6 But Moroni bent his own nature and created out of his knowledge of war a wisdom in the use of tools. And this peaceable thing did he make out of the learning he had acquired during his younger years. With this wisdom he did elevate himself again in the eyes of the people. Yea, the Nem saw in him that which was needed by the people in the way of leadership and they did elevate him to the seat of high priest in the stead of Heinmet. And this was the way with him. 
7 For, it is certain that Moroni could not remain in that frame of mind wherein he found himself at the disaster that was the conclusion of the Nephite war. Yea, he had need of a change of heart in order that he might continue to live in the land. Had he not a mighty change of heart, then he certainly could not have lived as long as he did, for the pain of his past experience will have eaten at him day by day, and this will have beaten down his soul and his will to live. 
8 But he bent this nature in him to better purpose. He went from the teaching of war to the teaching of peace. He became a peacemaker in his own city and also in all the cities of the Nem of the mountain places. His preaching was of peace. His walking was in peace. His talking was of peace. And he did preach the kingdom of God in all places, at all times, to all people. 
9 And the people of his own city, even Elak Kowa, did make him their high priest and he did serve them with all his might. But this is not all, he did also utilize his experience in his stewardship and in this were the people greatly blessed and magnified. By his experience, he taught the people to pay more heed to personal purification than to public oblation and that the ordinances had for their purpose to bring the participant unto the Peacemaker, who is Christ, the same who is mighty to save, rather than that the ordinances themselves were a means unto salvation. In this the people became doers of the word and not hearers only. Yea, in this did the people take up the account for their own emergence and they were very much the better for it. 
10 For, during the stewardship of Moroni, there rose up a division of doctrine and it began in the city of Mentina. Yea, in all Meninta there was a division of thought concerning the priesthood and the ordinances, a thing which had never happened before. And some believed as Moroni that the ordinances were for the purpose of bringing souls unto the Peacemaker and that He would lead them and direct them into exaltation. But there were those whose beliefs had been modified by the teacher Tucantor and they believed that salvation comes only through the church and the priesthood. 
11 Now, this difference of belief did divide the people and they did begin to contend one with another. For, the common offering of the people, wherein they did make a consecration of their surplus goods, has always been in the hands of the high priest to administer unto the needy. But, being that there were very few who could be called needy in Mentina, and indeed in all the cities of the Nem, the surplus became very great. Such was the blessing of the manner in which the Nem did choose to live. 
12 But this great surplus gave the management of great wealth into the hands of the high priest, and this did corrupt the minds of many. For because of it, it became possible for the priests and the high priests to live upon the surplus and never lift their hands to any kind of work with their hands, claiming that the demands upon the priesthood were too great to allow for them to labor. And this is the thing which Tucantor taught his followers and he established priests over his flock. 
13 And it had always been the custom that the priests and the high priests were given to use the common offering because they were called upon by the people to a stewardship that took much of their time and prevented them from creating a surplus of their own. Nevertheless, this was never intended to take from them the responsibility to work with their hands alongside the rest of the people. 
14 But the division which did arise among the people on this point of doctrine, which was known by the people as the Tucantorites, as were the people who followed it, did hold that the priesthood was to be given only to men and that their responsibility was only to the ordinances and the administration of the churches, and that they were thus relieved of any other labor. 
15 And the common surplus was so great in some cities that the management of it constituted great wealth and great ability to control the lives of men and women. Yea, he who had the governing of the surplus, by necessity gained a certain amount of power. For, by its use many great things could be accomplished. 
16 But this was not the aim of the Tucantorites. They were men who craved dominion over the souls of men. Yea, they did entice with flattering words many men to come into their fold and to make their offerings to them and not into the common surplus. And they did begin to build up a city within the city and to draw away the people into the gaining of great wealth. 
17 Now, when the leaders of the people do this, how shall the people not follow? With this teaching in their hearts, the Tucantorites began to horde up their surplus unto themselves, just as their high priest did gather in all things unto himself. And as they saw their high priest do, so did they also. 
18 And the high priest taught that only he could confer the priesthood and that it was upon the principles of worthiness that he prescribed and set forth that a man might elevate himself above his fellow men by attaining it. This was the great evil of the Tucantorites and their teachings – that the people could look to mere man to declare their worthiness and had no responsibility for it themselves. And following this principle, every one of the followers of the Tucantorites did judge each their fellow man and they did set themselves up in tiers and in hierarchies. 
19 You can believe it! The followers of this religion did begin to judge each other upon this model also, each declaring to his fellow his righteousness and proving it by the approbation of the high priest and also by the amount of his offering and the importance of his position. For, if the high priest could hold sway over all the people by virtue of his position and because of the ordinances which only he could perform, then every man could do the same with his own stewardship. 
20 And they saw in this a means whereby a caste of workers could be built up and controlled so that they would have no more need of labor. And they calculated to live lives of leisure and of pleasure because of their dominion over the labor of others. 
21 By taking control over who might own the priesthood, the Tucantorites did also seek to take control over the entire city and all the people. For, to control the surplus is to control the stewardships, and to control the priesthood is to control 
the ordinances. Therefore, according to the doctrine of Tucantor, both the temporal and the spiritual life of the people were to be placed under the stewardship of the high priest of the city and of those whom he chose to anoint to the priesthood. 
22 And Tucantor sought to raise himself up as a prophet king and a ruler unto the people, deciding for them what was right both for the maintenance of their bodies and their families and also who might avail themselves of ordinances necessary for salvation, according to his doctrine. This was his design and at first, at least, there were many in Mentina who followed him. It is certain that so many did follow Tucantor in the beginning that the people were divided down the middle, the half believing in the teaching of the new prophet and the other remaining faithful to the doctrine of personal revelation and accountability. 
23 And his priests did not labor for their upkeep, but they did eat the provender given in offering by the believers who did labor. And they became indolent and lazy. And they did pass daily judgment on the people who were given them as their stewardship to shepherd, and very often this judgment was unrighteous and calculated only to edify themselves, that they might be further enriched in their persons. And because of the doctrine of the high priest, only those who were appointed by him could make privilege of the offerings of the people. 
24 In the streets did the followers of Tucantor’s doctrine contend with the people of Mentina. And in the public houses they did contest with their neighbors. And even in the synagogues they did cause disputations and it was not uncommonly done that the Tucantorites would so disrupt the meetings that the people went away with strife in the hearts. And the Tucantorites went from door to door declaring this new doctrine and demanding that their neighbors give to them of their surplus, because that their high priest had once been thrown out of the High Place and made a beggar in the streets. And this was to take advantage of the custom of the people that no beggar was to be allowed to raise up his petition without being heard and answered by the people. 
25 For they did also teach that salvation is only possible through the administration of certain necessary ordinances, and these could only be performed by men unto whom the high priest should give the priesthood. But they went door to door declaring that their prophet had been made a beggar and that if the people failed in their covenant which they had made according to the Law of Consecration, they could not be saved in the Kingdom of God. And they also taught that because the people had made a beggar of their high priest, they had given up all authority to perform ordinances. Indeed, the Tucantorites claimed that the people had exercised unrighteous dominion over their chosen high priest and that this disqualified them for the blessings of heaven and necessitated a regulation of the priesthood and of the church. 
26 But this dissention did not go much further than the city of Mentina. For, Tucantor taught that all authority was held by the high priest of the city, but he could not convince the people that all high priests fell under his stewardship. And his time and energy was taken up preaching to his growing body of followers in Mentina, to the effect that his doctrine had little opportunity to infect very greatly in other places. 
27 Whereas Moroni did have occasion to travel about and to teach in the synagogues and in the councils of the various cities and settlements in Meninta and also in the region immediately north and south of Mentina. And also, because of his relationship with the city of Nespelem, he did also have occasion to visit that region and to teach in their synagogues. 
28 And Micah, the same who called for the council of Mentina to hear the matter of Tucantor, did also travel about to teach the way of the Nem in all the cities. Even out to the Nem of the Plains and to Corianton did he also travel to give word of the things that were taking place in Mentina. 
29 And the teaching of these men was great and powerful to the convincing of the people to retain to what they had received by the Lord and to avoid the teachings of the Tucantorites which came into their ears in diverse manners. For, they were men of great renown and also they taught with the Spirit. And the people believed them because the Holy Ghost did testify to them the truth of their words. 
30 Now, Moroni taught a simple message, and these are the words which he taught whenever he was called upon to open his mouth: 
31 Behold, though a man live to the life of a tree, yet is he felled by time and decay, and though his days shall be long and prosperous, even so are they shortened and come to an end. Wherefore, is long life any test of worth? I say unto you, Nay. The life of man, be it long or short, does not qualify him. 
32 And behold, a man may have many cattle and horses, and his fields may bloom and give forth great abundance. Yea, and his house may be filled with provender and his storehouse overrunning with surplus. And yet, is he well? Does the shaft of death not fell him also as the forester does fell a tree in the forest? What can he buy with grain and beasts when his days are come to an end? I say unto you, All his goods cannot buy him even one day longer than the appointed time. 
33 Yea, and a man may seize upon a wife of great renown, yea, a wife of wisdom and of talents. And without question he may be greatly blessed in the companionship of his wife. Yet, can she with all her talents turn away the shaft of death in the appointed time? 
34 And behold, a man may build him a city with many towers and he may rule that city in righteousness. Yea, his people may make him a king unto them and raise him up a standard and an ensign to the nations of the world. And even such a king may be blessed of the Lord with great wisdom, and great stores of knowledge to the good of all his subjects. Yet, in the appointed time, shall he escape death? 
35 In all things then, the king is the same as the bondservant. Yea, the great and mighty are as the small and the weak and nothing may prevent every one of us from following the same path when the appointed time of the Lord comes upon us. Yea, the first and the greatest have no advantage over the last and the least in the due time of the Lord. 
36 For, though all men become priests and kings, even after the right manner of the Lord, shall they gain sovereignty over that law which the Creator has set before the foundation of the world? I say unto you, Nay. Kings and paupers shall stand in their lot in the hour appointed and no priesthood or kingship shall grant them reprieve. Not even the mightiest man may buy with money, or with fame, or with riches, or with authority, any advantage over any of the children of men. Behold and beware, we shall go when we shall go. 
37 And behold, my good wife may be a Healer and balm my pain and treat my ills all of my life. And in her very accomplished and skillful way she may extend the day of my life but only a moment. And again, with all her talent she may make of my walk a pleasant journey and of my talk a sweetened song. But, when my life has come to the appointed time, can she remove the hour with all her talent and with all goodness? Who can answer me? 
38 Yea, and I may say that I have never wanted for food in all the days of my life, and therefore might I boast that I shall not leave it by starvation. Yet, with all my cattle and all the harvest of my fields, and with all the food on my table and in my storehouse, yea, withal that I do give unto the needy and provide that never a beggar shall stand at my hearth but that I do fill his arms and his belly and let not his entreaty rise up without answer, even so, may I say that the Lord shall take away the hour from me because of all this? Nay. 
39 And though I become as Methuselah of old, or as Father Adam and live nine hundred years or more, behold, I might boast of long life and many days, but will 
the day foretold in the great song of my creation be forestalled because of my great age? 
40 Yea, and in all these things can we lay claim to anything different than that which does also befall all things living? I say unto you, Nay. For, every blade of grass does burst from the earth in the appointed time and it does grow and prosper. And by and by it does give of its grain and its corn does ripen. Then does it cast its seed into the earth and wither. And behold, there is not one blade of grass that is not blown down in the blast and broken with the frost. And the snow does flatten it that it fall down even unto the earth. The same is it with all living things. 
41 Yea, and all wild beasts of the forest and of the mountain do drop their young and they do grow and prosper according as their Creator shall warrant. Yet, do they not also grow ill and halt? And when they do, that same Creator does appoint the hour of their failing and also the manner of their disposition, that not one thing is wasted. 
42 And so it is with horses and with cattle, and with all living things that do walk upon the earth or fly upon the winds or swim upon the waves. There is not one thing unto which the Father has given matter and unto which the Mother has given life that shall not fulfill the measure of its creation. And if it is measured, it shall have its beginning and it shall have its end. 
43 Yea, and though man build his house of solid and durable stone, shall it stand forever? Or how long will it stand? When heaven and earth pass away, shall it remain? I say unto you, Not one stone shall be left standing atop another, for all things have their appointed time and not one thing shall avoid that which has been set in the Creation. 
44 Wherefore, man does not stand alone in the determining of all things, but has an equal portion in all the law of creation. Though a man be more intelligent than they all, yet is he felled as quick, for the bounds of this life are set and few there might be who have recourse from them. They are mighty and strong indeed, but not of themselves. 
45 Yea, even the very House of the Lord, which man shall build because of the commandment of God, yea, even so mighty a house as that, shall not last but shall crumble into the earth out of which it was fashioned. And the Holy City, though it might lay claim to much preservation through many generations of men, even so it does decay, for it is decreed. 
46 And all the beasts of the field, shall live out their appointed lives and fulfill the full measure of their creation. For the Lord has measured and drawn the cord around them all. And behold, He has decreed the times and the seasons thereof. 
47 And the waste places are peopled with the wild beasts and are the space of their days also not measured unto them according to that decree made in heaven when the Lord did mete out their dominion on the earth? Or does the Lord not also know His kingdom and measure it with the cord, and pace the borders around thereof? 
48 And behold, men and women do share all this with the other living things of this creation. And the Creator has given us dominion over all these things, or in other words, the stewardship of them. But, having the stewardship of them, does this mean that we in our carnal state, are ought different from them? I say unto you, Nay, for we are all relations. 
49 For this is the state in which the Creator did make us and He has placed the bounds of this creature condition. But is this all the life of man? Is this that wondrous thing to which we look forward with a brightened and gleaming vision of faith? Is this the crown and the scepter promised to the sons and daughters of the King of Heaven? Nay, I say unto you, that King has provided means whereby His heirs shall inherit His kingdom and emerge from out of their created state. And behold, toward that end, He has given commandments and ordinances to guide us even unto that stature and perfection necessary to steward a greater work than this. 
50 Behold, when a man or a woman undertake to learn the stewardship of the carpenter, do they simply take up the carpenter’s tools and build a lintel? I say unto you, Nay, but they do make themselves an apprentice to the master of the craft. Yea, they do work under the tutelage and mentoring of one who is already great in skill and in knowledge. How is it, then, that men do take up the work and will of the Lord glibly and without forethought? 
51 And the master does assign unto the apprentice tasks to complete which each in its turn do teach principles that are of great importance to the craft. And the apprentice works diligently at the tasks until proficiency is attained. Yea, the apprentice is perfected in each skill by its practice under the watchful eye of the master. And behold, the performance of each task does hone and perfect the skills of the apprentice. 
52 Yea, and the apprentice moves from one skill to another in due course as the master shall decree. And even when the master shall discern a degree of competence and commitment in the apprentice, he does assign that one to assist those less knowledgeable and less skilled so that they also might gain even that which, through steadfastness and diligence, he has obtained. And even in inexperience, yet is experience gained in more than just the working of the wood, but also in the teaching of those who would come after him. 
53 Behold, I say unto you, The Lord is no different in this than the carpenter, or the raddle miller, or the fuller, or the weaver, or the potter, or any other maker of goods. For behold, He does desire that we should become like even unto Himself, the Master. And He does also give us assignments that are designed to give us the mastery of His craft through steadfastness and diligence. And the tasks that He assigns are the commandments, and the manner in which He does call us out to labor and to teach is the priesthood. Can you see how He hones us? Can you see how He perfects us? 
54 And it is obedience unto these things that does begin to change this corruptible into something more refined. Yea, by the Law of Obedience we do accept and learn the Gospel. Wherefore, it is called the Law of Obedience and the Law of the Gospel. And it is by this law that men begin to set aside the natural man and take up that which is spiritual. It is also by this law that men begin to understand that the natural law is part of the celestial world, but that man’s knowledge of it is woefully insufficient. Wherefore, he does begin by performances to exercise a little of the spiritual into the material, and in so doing he discovers God in everything. 
55 And we are not beasts unto the Lord. For, though He loves and saves all the creations of His hands, we are the sons and daughters of God, even His Father and Mother which are in Heaven. Behold, He does surely desire that we emerge out of this corruptible and arise into an incorruptible. Yea, just as a potter does not wish that his apprentice should make wares that crumble in the kiln, so also does the Lord desire that we shall aspire to His stature and become as He is. Wherefore, He does give commandments, the obedience to which shall cause us to arise even unto His stature. 
56 And look! The good master does teach more than just the mechanics of the trade. He is not an evil taskmaster but would have us all become the molders and modelers of talent and of abilities. Yea, He does give us stewardship of the development of others. See how He is concerned that we learn to become like Him in character and not only in skill. For, is the apprentice who learns under the good taskmaster ever the servant of his teacher? Of a surety it is so, for the apprentice becomes as the master. But, shall not the apprentice who learns his skill under the tyrant always wish to be released from his contract? Behold, the Lord is the good taskmaster. 
57 And behold, He does not give commandments because the kingdom has been delivered into His hands. He commands us so that we may learn by principle and by deed what manner of men and what manner of women we ought to become. Yea, He gives commandments for no other purpose. And the priesthood, and the administration of our callings in it, has but one purpose also – it is to teach us how to set down this corruptible and take up the mantle of His mastery. 
58 For behold, in the performance of our duty in the priesthood, we do demonstrate our willingness to keep His commandments and to do His will instead of our own. In this are we perfected in Him. Yea, the roughness of our imperfection is taken off of us one task at a time, just as the stone is squared one blow at a time. 
59 Wherefore is this law part of that great thing that He has revealed unto the prophets and it is part of that great thing which is done in the High Place. Behold, because of it we might strive to become even as He is. This is the thing which He most desires of us, and behold, it ought to be the thing we most desire of ourselves. 
60 Now, do men and women labor only to feed themselves? Behold, I say unto you, Nay. For, of what value is such self-service? Is it enough to strive through life merely to end each day without hunger? Or is there more to living than the filling of the belly? And is life measured by the amount of meal in the bottle or wine in the skin? 
61 For behold, if the wineskin is foul, shall the wine thereof be good for the belly? And no unclean or impure thing may stand in the presence of the Lord, wherefore, how shall a man ever stand there? He must learn to sacrifice of himself freely through serving his fellow man. Verily, this shall cleanse him of his selfishness. 
62 Wherefore, it is by sacrifice that we are made pure. Yea, we do cleanse ourselves of our physical impurities when we do emulate the sacrifice of the Lord. Yea, we do give of our water and of our oil, and yet our cup does run overfull. Behold, in this sacrifice, which is in the similitude of His sacrifice and of woman’s, we do purify ourselves in the body. And this is also the purpose of our fasting and our prayer. 
63 And it is obedience to the observance of these things whereby we become like unto our Lord. And behold, it is called the Law of Sacrifice because of the great sacrifice that He made for all of us. By it we are made more perfect, being able to set aside our needs and wants in order that we may more clearly see the wants and the needs of others. Behold, if we can become as He is, and sacrifice for the sake of all living, then have we learned to live this law more perfectly. 
64 Yea, the Lord did make a sacrifice and did give us this law that we might become like Him in all things. For, women do make this sacrifice for the sake of all living, and in it and through it we have our being. Even He, the greatest of all, did make an emblem of the type and kind of His sacrifice, for it was like unto that rendered for us by all mothers. And so we see that the sacrifice of women is the emblem of our physical sacrifice. Even so is the sacrifice of the Lord an emblem of our spiritual sacrifice. 
65 And behold, the Lord did tread the wine and cleanse the press after Him. Yea, He did make the sacrifice that shall purify us every whit. But we must avail ourselves of His great sacrifice. Yea, we must commit ourselves to become like Him. Behold, if we are the wine of His sacrifice, then let us be pure wine of His own making. Let us do all that we can to do what we see Him do. And does our body suffer ought from the purification after the manner of the Children of Ammon? Can we ever suffer as He did for us? Of a surety not. But we may make an attempt to be like Him who suffered for us. 
66 In fasting and in prayer we do come closer to the true meaning of living. For out of such sacrifice we do create the means wherewith we might also measure out sustenance unto the needy. And does our belly suffer ought because of our fasting? Behold, I say unto you, Nay. But we are the more purified of the corruption of the world. Yea, our body is made more purified. And behold, even our spirit is the more purified, for we have sacrificed not for the sake of our own, but for the sake of the needy. 
67 Wherefore is this not also part of that great thing that He has revealed unto the prophets and also part of that great thing which is done in the High Place? Behold, because of it we might strive to become even as He is by doing the things we see Him do. This is the thing which He most desires of us, and behold, it ought to be the thing we most desire of ourselves. 
68 Behold, did not the Lord teach us that, in the beginning of all things, even in the creation, that man is not without the woman, nor is the woman without the man, but the one working alone brings together but does not create? 
69 It is verily so, that the Father may bring together matter and materials. Indeed, a man may build him a house with rooms for every purpose. Then what? Shall he sit the day long in the house by himself? There is no purpose in this, for a man can just as easily sit alone upon a rock out under the heavens and be as content. 
70 And a woman may bear a child and take it into her arms and give it nourishment at her breast. But how shall she nurture that child without protection? Shall she find a hollow of a tree or a tussock of grass in which to hide her child while she goes out into the wilderness to gather together the stuff of life with which to sustain the fruit of her womb? 
71 Wherefore, a man builds a house and the woman enters into it, and it does provide safety for the little ones. This is family purpose and it is holy. 
72 And it is obedience unto these things that does begin to change the man and the women into something which is unified. Yea, by the Law of Chastity we do also accept and learn the Gospel. And it is by this law that men do bind themselves unto women and women do bind themselves unto men. And this is a thing that must be, if they are to become truly as the Creator. For, without the binding of the Mother and the Father, there is not anything created that is created. And again, by this law men and women begin to understand that the natural law is part of the Celestial world, but that man’s knowledge of it is entirely insufficient. Wherefore, he does begin by performances to exercise a little of the spiritual into the material, and in so doing he discovers God in everything. 
73 The same is the family of God. The Eternal Father gives that endowment of power which does provide place. The Eternal Mother gives the endowment of power which brings life unto all the place. Together they create, and without the two endowments of power there is no creation. 
74 Yea, because of the Mother, we may perceive ourselves and know that we are. Verily, we are intelligent of our surroundings and of the creation because of that which She has given. Yea, it is Her endowment that gives us self-knowing and because of that, we may know who we verily are and what is our place in the Universe. 
75 And behold, because of the Father, we have purpose and function. Yea, there is much that is organized and that will obey the word and will of the Creator. We have our physical bodies and the physical world because of His endowment, and because He has shared His power with us, we are given to duplicate His work. 
76 Wherefore, when a man and a woman make a covenant bond one with another, when their corruptible becomes incorruptible, yea, when heaven and earth pass away, yet shall that bond wherewith they did bind themselves pass not away. For behold, by that endowment of power given us of the Holy Ghost, yea, even that which seals all things unto the Lord which are His indeed, verily we are sealed up also unto Him and become His. Wherefore, that bond by which the man and the woman do bind themselves, and that covenant, are also sealed by this Holy Spirit of Promise and their contract becomes durable, being that it does belong to one who is eternal. 
77 And again I ask you, is this not part of that great thing that He has revealed unto the prophets and is it not part of that great thing which is done in the High Place? Behold, because of it we might strive to become even as He is. This is the thing which He most desires of us, and behold, it ought to be the thing we most desire of ourselves. 
78 But, it is the way of the world that men do purport to own the earth because the Lord did give it unto us. Wherefore, every man thinks that his possessions are given him of God and that his wealth is a blessing from God. But can he truly own the earth? For, it is God’s footstool. 
79 And men do gather unto themselves every good thing and they do esteem themselves mighty because of their many possessions. Behold, they heap up riches and the praise of the world, but is there satisfaction in any of it? Can anything coveted by man save him? 
80 And behold, he does cover himself with every precious thing. Yea, with the fineness of his clothing he does show his greatness unto his neighbor. And he does put on precious things, of gold and silver, and adorn himself with rings and with precious stones and every costly thing. And this is to manifest to his neighbor his high stature. 
81 But behold, the Lord has bid us come out of Babylon and touch not her uncleanness. Yea, we have been shown a more perfect way and we have proven it in our walk and in our talk. Shall we cast aside what He has taught us for a potsherd? Shall we esteem the work of our own hands greater than His majesty? Shall we choose the slavery of the world over that liberty with which He does make us free? 
82 And it is obedience unto these things that does begin to change the man and the community and the family of man into something which is unified. Yea, by the Law of Consecration we do also accept and learn the Gospel. And it is by this law that men and women do prove that they can put aside the Babylon in their hearts and cast off and subdue the natural man. Yea, and we do demonstrate that we are not subject to the bondage of the world. Yea, we do prove that we can be built upon the rock and firm foundation of the Lord and of His house. Verily, this is a thing that must be, if we are to become truly as the Creator. For behold, the Lord cannot establish Zion in any degree of slavery or bondage. Wherefore, how can we say that we are His people, and yet bind ourselves to the world? And again, by this law men and women begin to understand that the natural law is part of the celestial world, but that man’s knowledge of it is entirely insufficient. Wherefore, they do begin by performances to exercise a little of the spiritual into the material, and in so doing, do they not discover God in everything? 
83 And behold, He has loosed the bonds of our indenture. Yea, He has broken the slavery with which we were bound. And every man and woman that walks any street or plies any trade in the cities of the Nem enjoys the same freedom because of the path that the Lord has taught us. Yea, behold, there is not a beggar in all the cities and no one is bound to any other. Behold, He has taken us into His own house and we are adopted of Him. We are become as His own heirs, wherefore, of what value is gold? 
84 Shall not the crown and the scepter be enough for us when He does gather in His household? And what shall gold and silver purchase when all things are naturally provided for our use? And behold, shall the sons and daughters of God esteem each the other differently because of the manner in which they are dressed? I say unto you, Nay. 
85 And what shall be our desire, who enjoy the treasures of eternity? Shall we desire anything bought of money? Or what shall be bought when the Holy Ghost brings all things to our remembrance, and when the Son of God does give unto us all that the Father has? 
86 And I ask you, what kingdom of men shall compare to that glory we shall receive in the kingdom of God? What plot of land, field or parcel shall compare to the mansions that our Lord has spoken of? And shall we not render again all that is His when we come into His presence? Then, I ask you, if it is the best that we can do in this life to come unto Him even in this flesh, is not all that we might amass now but dross? For the world, and all that is, belongs to no mere man, but is the Lord’s footstool. Wherefore, how may a man own the world or even any portion of it? 
87 Behold, I say unto you, These are fundamental principles which are taught in all the scriptures. Yea, they are four basic and foundational precepts upon which all the law and the prophets are built. And is it possible that a man or a woman may learn and perfect these four laws without the priesthood? Can they do this without the church? I say unto you, Yea, it is verily possible, howbeit the more difficult for the lack of them. 
88 Now, I do not mean to speak against such things, but only to say that in their absence the Lord has always provided a means by which the Children of God may accomplish that which they have been commanded to do. Yea, even if it is only that which they received in the first council which was in heaven, barring any other gospel, which shall draw them unto Christ. 
89 For God is no respecter of persons and what He provides for one He does provide for all. And, if He provides a means whereby one might be saved from this corruption, then He surely provides a means whereby all may be saved. For, this is His express purpose, to provide for the perfected state into which He would that His children might come. 
90 And behold, He does give unto some disciples, and unto others prophets. And unto still others He does give priests and teachers and all manner of ministers of many kinds. And it is very often through these ministers that the Lord does teach His gospel, and He does also use them to beckon the people to come unto Him. As also the churches and the synagogues, yea, they also serve this purpose. But, that He does call out His servants that they might further His purpose, does this necessarily mean that He cannot do it without them? Or, is the Lord dependent upon any man in order that His word and will might be carried out unto the children of men? I say unto you, Nay. 
91 For behold, men and women must rely upon the Lord, and upon the peculiar workings of the Holy Ghost, in order to know the truth of anything. And this ceases not to be even when he has given prophets and priesthood. How then shall men decide for the Lord what is true and what is right? And if men may not decide for the Lord what is true, how then shall they decide for other men, being the sons of God? 
92 Behold, He has promised that He shall do nothing without revealing his secrets unto His servants the prophets, of this you may be sure. And you may also be sure that, when such prophets and ministers, yea, the servants of the Lord, do speak by the power of the Holy Ghost, behold, they do reveal unto men and women the very mysteries of God. But does this signify that the mysteries may only be gained through such? Behold, I say unto you, The man who shall teach such things only seeks to take hold upon the yoke of Christ and bind it unto his own oxen. Then does he strive to drive the Lord to and fro. Shall this become the purpose of priesthood? 
93 And where men worship God, they do raise up places where such oblations may be made. Yea, and such places are good for the Lord’s work, inasmuch as they do provide a place for the people to come together in unity. And these places of worship do become of great importance unto the people, for they do demonstrate, at least in part, their dedication to the Lord in the building of their churches and their synagogues. And especially in the constructing of the lodges of the High Place do they honor their God. But does all this building of buildings in order to give honor unto their God signify that they may not honor Him in their homes or in the byways? Behold, I exhort you, never believe it. 
94 For behold, in our first home, yea, even in that creation out of which we came before the world was, we did meet with our Father and we did sit down with Him, and we did honor Him when we received of Him the New and Everlasting Covenant. Yea, the council was of great personal import unto us and we did take it up each one according to our own volition and our agency. Did He command us to obey Him? Nay! But we did hear His plan freely and we did take it up personally. 
95 Wherefore, even without such things as churches and priesthood, we have within us a memory of the things that were accomplished there, and, in the absence of any other help or comfort, surely the Holy Ghost shall bring such things to our remembrance. Or shall we be left alone in a dreary world to find out the truth of all things by the strength of the arm of flesh? Shall we secure eternity upon the wisdom of the wise only? 
96 On the contrary. Behold, the Lord does provide all people in all times the means whereby they might seek His face personally. And He does give four great tasks and commandments unto the children of men. And, if they do avail themselves of these commandments, observing to keep them and to strive to perfect them, then are they taken speedily upon the Way. And behold, you may believe it, when you shall walk upon the Way with the wind beneath your feet, you shall see even the very face of God. Yea, you shall have come even unto Him as He has always beckoned His children to do, and you shall receive of Him all things that shall be necessary for you. Yea, when the Lord is your guide, and when the Lord is your mentor and teacher, do you believe that you shall lack anything? Do you believe that any other person might be the bringer of greater light and greater truth than that which the Lord and the Holy Ghost together might bring you? Nay, but believe it not. For, mere man has not all things before him, as the Lord surely does have. Wherefore, we must come unto Christ in order that we might be presented at the veil, in order that we might converse again with the Father face to face. 
97 This is the plan, even the great purpose of the Lord our God, and shall any man, no matter his priesthood, bring us closer to the Father than Him? Shall any man have greater doctrine or teachings? Shall any ordinance do more to demonstrate that we do draw ourselves nigh unto Him than that we stand in His mighty presence? Behold, where can such nonsense be believed? 
98 Wherefore, you Nem, believe it not when a man comes to your door and declares to you that you may only receive that which is necessary for salvation’s sake from some man or set of men. Believe it not when such men come into the synagogue and preach unto you a gospel of troubles. Let not such provocations enter into your hearts. 
99 And when self-sustaining and self-serving men do seek to change the doctrine of peace, do not strive with them, but strive only with the Spirit. For, if you maintain that promise which the Lord has given you, do you think that He will leave you comfortless in the time of trouble and of uncertainty? I say unto you, Nay. He shall surely speak to you. Wherefore, you shall have no purpose in strife with your fellowman on account of the gospel or of gospels. Seek the face of God and the disturber shall give you no pause. 
100 And when you are accused of creating a beggar out of that man who shall continually rebel against the Lord, behold, give him of your surplus but only as much as will fill his immediate needs. Yea, feed him but for that day only and you shall fulfill righteousness. But give not the stewardship of your surplus into his hands who shall claim it by right of priesthood. 
101 And behold, when a man does strive to usurp ought that has been given from on high, do not give him of your time or your attention. Nay, strive not with him at all, for his argument is wickedness. Wherefore, how shall you properly steward the precious time the Lord has given you in contending with him who shall speak nonsense? For, has the Lord Himself not taught certain things plainly? Then why shall we spend our time justifying His words in repetition? 
102 And in all things let us hold true to those precious principles that He has taught us. Do you doubt the words of the scriptures? Then I exhort you, put them to the test. Inquire of the Lord concerning the object of your doubt. Do you believe that He shall not answer you because that He has spoken unto others already? Behold, this is folly, for who shall decide for the Lord but Himself when He is finished speaking and when He shall say no more to any man. Is it within you to dictate unto whom He shall give instruction, be you great or small? I say unto you, Nay. 
103 And when a man shall declare unto you that the Lord is a respecter of persons, and that He does give unto some and that He does withhold His word and His will from others, you may believe that such a one is a thief and a robber. Yea, he is a liar and puts words in the Lord’s mouth, even dishonorable words. For behold, shall a man turn unto his Lord to speak to Him if he does not also strive to do away with his sins? Can he think to come unto God in any state of wickedness? And should any man or woman be denied access to a forgiving Lord? Or is His love so conditional? 
104 Behold, sit at the feet of prophets and of teachers and be instructed of them. But do not rely upon them for ought that you think might be important for salvation. Nay, you cannot surrender your personal responsibility in this thing to any man. Shall he declare unto you that you must or you give up your salvation, do but render unto him of your courtesy in return, but not of your confidence. For such a one boasts of private knowledge and seeks to regulate God and His goodness. Behold, a true prophet of God shall never place himself an obstacle between the Lord and His children. 
105 For, the Nem know, and I shall hope that all them who would lay claim to belief in Christ do also know, whereunto they shall look for their salvation. And it is not to any man, but only unto that Holy One who is mighty to save. Or can any man save a single hair on your head? I say unto you, To have confidence in the strength of the arm of the flesh shall bring disappointment. 
106 For when all people sit at the feet of the Lord for their teaching, and when all people are instructed of the Lord in matters of doctrine and of understanding, behold, they shall all have become prophets and seers. Yea, they shall speak with the tongues of Angels and shall sit them down even on the right hand of God forever. Is there greater doctrine to be learned anywhere in the world than this? And is there any greater teacher to teach this doctrine than the author of it? 
107 And with these words did Moroni teach in the temples, in the churches and in the synagogues. 


CHAPTER 2 
1 And Moroni did travel from city to city, and from settlement to settlement, in all the regions of the Nem of the Mountains, and even he did travel out to the West Sea, and he did preach this message unto all the people. 
2 And the people did esteem his message of great worth. For, it did cause them to remember the purpose of the gospel in their lives – that it should not become a means whereby men and women are enslaved, but that they might receive of it that through which the Lord does liberate His children. 
3 Now, when he undertook to travel away from his own city, he did so in the warm months, for the roads were not always safe to travel at other times. And he did take with him trusty men, men whom he had known for many years. And some of these men were among those who had fought beside him in the Nephite war. Yea, they went in a body of twelve and they called themselves the Traveling Council of Peli. And they did all things in unity and they had all things in common. 
4 And now and then, they divided themselves so that they might go and visit many cities and settlements at once. And when they did this, they did divide into threes, and they went three by three. But when they entered into any city, they did greet the people in the name of the Lord and in the name of the Traveling Council of Peli. And thus they became known unto all the people in the region. 
5 And when they were accepted by the council of a certain community, they did offer ceremony and oblation in the presence of all the people. They did offer up sacred smoke after the manner and pattern of Moroni, and they did lead out in the Purification of the Ammonites. Yea, they did make a sacred suffering with all the people who would celebrate this sacrifice with them. 
6 In many of the places whereunto they did visit during their travels, they found no reason to make any regulation, or in other words, when they met in council with the men and women of that city, they saw nothing about which they might make any suggestion, and they celebrated with the people in the Spirit. Nevertheless, they did always preach the message that Moroni had taught them and this did unite them with all the people. 
7 Now, they did not go unto the people in order that they might convince them of one viewpoint over another. They went because they were driven by the Spirit. And it was not in order that they might combat Tucantor and his rebellion, for his teachings did not travel much outside of Mentina at that time. But they did travel unto all the places in the mountains all the way unto the West Sea, and even they did teach some who came over from among the Nem of the Islands, in order that the cities might be more united and that greater contact might be established between them. Yea, they desired that the people might be more unified in their understanding of the gospel and unto this end did they travel from city to city. 
8 And they were not disappointed in their desire. For there had not been much done along this line for many generations. Now, do not think that the people had not enjoyed communion with other cities, but their lives were so much tied to their own city and their own stewardship that they had little opportunity to travel about and visit other cities and other settlements except to transport goods. 
9 Wherefore the traveling council gave the people of the scattered cities of the Nem an opportunity to hear and to honor teachers from other places. And this did cause them to esteem the Nem as one nation and one people. 
10 And the traveling council did prove to the people that they could live in diverse places upon the land and yet have security and unity because of their unity in the covenants and commitments they had all made to live the way the Lord had taught them. Indeed, because of the traveling Peli, they did not feel isolated one from another. 
11 And also when the people saw that the traveling Peli taught the oblations, sacraments and ordinances that were taught by the Lord and by Timothy and his brethren, they were the more unified in their teachings, even so much so that they did also take up their concentration upon the four great covenants of the High Place. Yea, and in every place where the traveling Peli sojourned, they did assist the people in building the High Place and in setting up the performance of the ordinances there. 
12 The traveling Peli became renowned in all the land because of their knowledge and because of the great spirit with which they did teach the discourse that Moroni had taught them. And whenever they were gathered in any one place, they did observe to teach in unison, never differing in their discourse. Yea, they did pray together, and they did fast together. They did observe the Purification of the Ammonites together and they did participate together in the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper. They were a body and a band of perfect unity and they had all things in common. 
13 And it was for this cause that Moroni did make his journey unto the various cities of the Nem. For he esteemed it the best work that he could do. And what other work could there be of greater import than that we wear out our lives in the service of the Lord and of His children? This, verily, is the thing that Moroni taught and his life became an example unto us all. 
14 And they who went with Moroni, or also they who were sent by him unto the cities, did this walking service because of the great love they had for their Lord and also for their brothers and sisters of the Nem. They did not do it because of the esteem of the people. For, who knew them before that they had visited their cities? Nay, they set out because they loved their God and the Spirit had testified mightily to them of the rightness of the mission. And also they set out because they loved the Nem and desired not that they should dwindle in unbelief because of the whisperings and conspiring of evil or misinformed men. 
15 And this took place throughout the stewardship of Moroni and it became a great work. For the Nem unified once again into a great nation under the influence of this great Peli and high priest. And to write all of his doings and all of his works would fill up many volumes, wherefore, he did not write much of his own doings in his own record. And also he felt not to praise himself for his own works. Such was his humility. 
16 Nevertheless, Moroni is known throughout the land as one of the greatest prophets of the Nem and it is for this reason that one may see his mark in many places written into the stones. Yea, he became a hero unto the people and most especially unto the young men who found in the traveling councils and the walking service a mission for themselves and a means whereby they might serve the nation as a whole and not only their own community. 


CHAPTER 3 
1 Now Moroni, even that same man who was known unto the Nephites as Moroni, son of Mormon, did live and serve the Lord all the days of his life. And he lived one hundred and forty two years and he did give up the ghost. 
2 And in his stewardship he did see the reuniting of the Nem of the Mountains. For behold, the Great War had caused the Nem cities to become distant and dividing in some things. Wherefore, the Nem were not of one heart and one mind in all things and, although they did provide for their own people in their own regions, they had ceased for a time to interact as a unified nation of communities. This spirit was restored to the Nem because of the ministry of Moroni. 
3 For the cities did begin to send once again their representatives unto Elak Kowa to the Great Councils. And they did also begin to organize again into the General Councils. Wherefore, groups of cities did meet in councils as Nem and not merely for their own communities. 
4 And following the example set by Moroni, many cities did also begin to send out their own Traveling Councils of Peli to visit other cities. Now, this is the thing that did begin to most unify the cities one to another. For, the people began to know each other by this mobilizing of their young men and women and it became a great blessing unto the people. 
5 Now, also it must be written and recorded here that, because of the teachings of Moroni and because of the message that he sent by his own voice and also by the voice of the traveling Peli, the cities did undertake to construct their own temples. And the ordinances of the High Place were spread to all the cities and many of the settlements of the Nem of the Mountains. 
6 One of the purposes of the Traveling Council of Peli was to instruct the people in the building of the Lodges and also to assist them in setting up and performing the ordinances. Yea, the young people did go forth and teach the Nem not only principles of the High Place but also in the actual performing of the ceremonies. 
7 And being so united in purpose, and also having their attention brought back unto the principles of salvation, the people and the councils of the cities and the settlements did also begin to step out once again in the performance of their civic duties. Yea, they did become more effective in their own councils and also they did become more active in the councils of the nation as a whole. 
8 And thus we see how the great captain of the Nephite armies was instrumental in bringing into balance all that had been disturbed because of the war and the threat of war. 
9 In this did Moroni teach a vital message of healing unto all the people. For, did not the people pass from a condition of war even unto a condition of peace? And did they not pass from a condition of doubt and despair unto a condition of confidence and of hope? And, whereas the disunity that arose out of the great preparations for war did threaten to undue the nation, the unity that arose out of the building up of the High Places in all the land did promise to edify the nation. Behold, this is healing. Yea, it is the healing of a nation, and it is in this healing that all people may emerge from one state into another. 


CHAPTER 4 
1 Now, all that Moroni did in the days of his stewardship is written in another book. But I have written somewhat more concerning him because of the great respect and honor which I hold for him in my heart. Behold, I am Shioni Akek and I am his son. 
2 And when my father had gone unto his ancestors, the council of Elak Kowa did bid me return unto the city of my father. For they did desire to raise me unto the seat of high priest. And I did accept the calling with the approbation of all the city. 
3 Some would call this a great honor done unto me by the people of the city. For, whereas the city of Mentina had for many generations held a predominant position among the cities of the mountains and was considered to be the capital city of our nation, because of the Tucantorites, Mentina was no longer considered such and the Great Council was moved to Elak Kowa. 
4 And because of this transfer of the sentiment of the people, the high priest of Elak Kowa was made to preside over the Great Council. Wherefore, in accepting the calling of high priest of my own city, I did also accept a call to be the father of my nation. Or, in other words, the people did raise a voice of Common Consent that I should take charge of the High Place, the archives and of the surplus of the nation. 
5 This did anger many of the residents of the city of Mentina. For, they had, the half of them, taken up the doctrine of Tucantor and were not desirous that the importance of their city and of their high priest be lessened. And because the Common Consent of the residue of the inhabitants of the valley of Meninta did desire it, and the other cities did concur, the capital was relocated unto Elak Kowa. And the surplus that the cities sent to the capital no longer flowed into the storehouses at Mentina, but they did come unto Elak Kowa instead. 
6 And the Common Consent of the people is the rule of law among the Nem. There has been a body of laws formed in Mentina in times past. Indeed, the great prophet and high priest Pa Nat did labor diligently with the community council to form laws consistent with the manner in which we do live. But it was not Pa Nat who made the laws binding unto the people. Rather, it was the by the Common Consent of the people that the laws became enforceable. This is the basis of our community and our way of life. 
7 Howbeit, even though the transfer of the capital and of the surplus was done by the Common Consent, nevertheless, the Tucantorites of Mentina did stir the citizens of that city up into anger at the rest of the Nem and they did begin to cry out against us. Yea, and they did withhold from the donation all the surplus from the region round about Mentina. 
8 And they did also withdraw their counsel from the Great Council and did not send any delegates from Mentina. Because of this, there could be no vote and no election upon the points of counsel, for there could be no Common Consent of the people without that the people have opportunity to vote. 
9 Now, this became a great burden unto me, for I did not wish to be the cause for the disintegration of the peace in Meninta. But the division was great in the city of Mentina and all the people round about were at a loss to discover how it might be resolved. 
10 And I did call for a Great Council to convene in Elak Kowa to hear the matter. And because the matter concerned Mentina so particularly, they did send two delegates to the council. Now, one of the delegates was of the doctrine of Tucantor and one was not, and they did represent their city. And every city and settlement also sent delegates to take part in the council and hear the matter. 
11 And the delegates for Mentina were Hemeacum and Micah, even that same Micah who went unto the cities of the plains and of the lake country in the east to preach the message of Moroni. And Micah did stand before the council first and I did recognize him. And when he had taken up the staff, he did open his mouth to speak unto the great council. And these are the words of his speaking: 
12 Behold, I am Micah, of the city of Mentina, of the valley of Meninta, and I am a descendent of Oug and of Hagoth. I do stand up before this council to express the grievance of my city, for she has been sorely injured by this people. Yea, even all the Nem of the Mountains have injured the city of Mentina and all of her citizens. 
13 For, has not Mentina been considered the capital city of the Nem since the day that Hagoth built her? And does not every city and settlement of the Nem owe a debt of gratitude to her? And has not the surplus of all the cities ever flowed down into her storehouses since the Nem came into this country? And has not Mentina been gracious unto all, bestowing the surplus for the good of all? 
14 Howbeit now, after all that Mentina has done for the building up of the Nem and our way of life, can the people arbitrarily take from her the right of principal city? Has she not been a gathering place in all of our days? Has she not been an ensign to the nations? How can she be thus abused and thus dethroned? 
15 It is for this cause that Mentina has sent its delegates to this great council, to decry this injury and to demand that her right as principal city be returned to her. 
16 And Hemeacum did also stand upon his feet and he did request the staff. And I did grant him the staff that he might speak uninterrupted according to our custom. And he did address the council, saying: 
17 I also bring you greetings from Mentina. I am Hemeacum, and I too descend out of Father Hagoth. I too bring cause against this council for injury done to my city. For, the high priest of all the land has always been seated in Mentina. This is a tradition that has been passed down through many generations. Behold, it is the right of the city and the usurpation of it is not to be admitted. Yea, the high priest of the city of Mentina, even the high priest of all the lands of the Nem does demand that you return to him the keys and the surplus. For, the management of the surplus is his by right and by authority. Who are you that you think to take away from him what is rightfully his? 
18 And after this manner did the delegates for Mentina address the council. And I did take up the staff and I did stand also to speak before the council, saying: 
19 Behold, I am Shioni Akek. And my father was Moroni, the same who was Captain of the armies of the Nephites and who was also high priest in Mentina and in Elak Kowa. The people did make him to sit in the seat of high priest and he did fill his stewardship with honor. The same was my tutor and my mentor. 
20 Now, let us consider this matter carefully. For, as I see it, there are two principles at stake here. For the one part, we must consider whether Mentina, or any city for that matter, may have predominance over any other and whether the law comes of the Common Consent of all the Nem or is it to be determined by each city for its own residents. On the other part, we must consider the doctrine of Tucantor and the division it has caused in the valley of Meninta and most especially in Mentina. To my mind, these are the principles that must be examined. For they shall dictate the very complexion of our society hereafter. 
21 Let us take the first matter and examine it fully, perchance we may all come of a unity of mind and spirit concerning it before we discuss the second. Micah and Hemeacum shall speak for the city of Mentina. Let us recognize the delegates from the other cities of the Nem. 
22 And one by one the delegates stood upon their feet in the midst of the council and they did declare themselves. 
23 Midgan Idi, of the city of Elak Kowa did stand first and he did introduce himself, saying: 
24 Behold, I am Midgan Idi, the son of Idiancom, a Nephite who did stand with Moroni in the last battle of the Great War, and Pa Naest, a descendant of Hemen and I do represent the city of Elak Kowa. 
25 And Da-In, of Elak Kowa did stand up next, saying: 
26 I am Da-In and I descend from the Lamanites. I did leave the Great War, for I grew weary of the shedding of blood, and Moroni did adopt me into his band and family. I do also represent Elak Kowa. 
27 And the delegates from Potal did stand, saying: 
28 Behold, I am Kamiakim and this is my companion Toniah Lotnah. We are descendants of Hagoth and we represent the city of Potal. 
29 And the delegates from every city did stand forth and declare themselves one by one. And the names of the delegates I do record here in the order in which they did stand to be recognized. And they were: 
30 Nohonaya and Pa Sineth of the city of Elgiah; Parah and Nomiah Min, of the city of Pagwit; Monoriah and Mineat of Hagoth; Pingwit and Kayith of Sevim; Pa Wayat and Panah Nin of the women’s refuge of Korinah; Ealekoet Akek and Kochets Kunnin of Nespelem; Peliah and Beleuh of the Pahshi settlement of Porinor; Tlin Gee-it and Tso-Tsit of the city of Tliningsah and of Haydats; Rhen and Kaboret of the city of Witchittim and Kodahah; Megnem and Pa-In-Nah Waylit of Corianton and Winebag; Phaynith-Im and Phenith of the new settlement of Phenith Ee-it. 
31 And delegates from all the cities were present, but these were the delegates chosen by election to speak in the Great Council and to hear the cause that had been brought forth. And they did choose for themselves who would speak and who would not. Wherefore, the council was convened according to the traditions of our people, yea, even in the manner in which our first fathers did set as an example unto us. 
32 And I did call upon Micah to step forward to speak on behalf of his city in the examination of the first consideration and Hemeacum to speak for the second. And Micah arose from his place and strode into the center of the circle and he did address the council, saying: 
33 Brothers and sisters, Nem! I honor you and I am grateful that I should have this opportunity to stand up for my city and speak on behalf of her citizens. Behold the high priest of the city of Elak Kowa does do me great honor and I thank him. 
34 Behold, has the city of Mentina not always been the central city in this region? And have the laws that have been adopted by all the cities of the Nem not flowed out of Mentina since the very beginning of our sojourn here in the Land Northward? I say unto you, Yea. For, do we not have it in the records of our people that Pa Nat did write the laws and the statutes by which we do govern ourselves? Surely, none may question that it has been from out of Mentina that the call for the Great Council has come in the past. 
35 Yea, and is the temple at Mentina not the first temple to be built in the Land Northward? And was it not in Mentina where the records of the people were compiled and kept? Indeed, have we not ample record that visitors from far away lands, even from across the East Sea and from across the West Sea, have traveled long just to arrive in Mentina? Is it possible that any might deny the sacred role that the city of Mentina has played in the very history of our people? 
36 Behold, the surplus of all the cities has been sent unto the high priest of Mentina for many generations and has the high priest not distributed the surplus wisely? I say unto you, that he has. 
37 Wherefore then, shall the privileges of the principal city of the Nem be taken from her? Behold, this is the question that I raise before this council. 
38 And when Micah had made an end of speaking, he did sit down again in his place. 
39 And Midgan Idi did arise and the council did recognize him. And he did open his mouth to speak, saying: 
40 I too am honored that I might speak before this council and also that so great a man as Micah should condescend to give me the stand. And I should like to address the questions raised by Micah. Wherefore, I do beg his indulgence and also that of this council. 
41 For I do not believe that anyone who has come here today can deny any of the things which Micah has said about the city of Mentina. Of a surety, we must all admit that it was the first of the settlements of our people, after Hagoth took his people up into the mountains. And I think that none shall stand to deny that Mentina has been a very principal and even capital city of our nation. 
42 And it is also quite true and full of proof that Pa Nat’s record of the Laws of Mentina have been the model for most of the laws by which the Nem do govern themselves. And it is also without equivocation that Pa Nat was the high priest of Mentina when she recorded the laws. 
43 And there is no question that the first of the temples built by the Nem of the Mountains was built in Mentina, for it was the first of the cities. Wherefore, where else shall the Nem of the Mountains have built their first temple in the new land, but in the first city? 
44 Yea, and we must all admit that Mentina has been a destination for many men and women of great wisdom and knowledge who have come from many parts of the world. For behold, the archives are in the valley of salt and they are preserved there. Yea, and it has always been one of the duties of the high priest of Mentina to keep the archives and who sits here who will deny this? 
45 But behold, I would ask this council, because a thing has ever been, does it signify that it shall or must always be? Is the city of Mentina the only place among the Nem where the voice of the people may raise up a council of all the people? And what are the privileges that one city may claim over another? Is any piece of land any different than another? Is it the plot of land upon which we are established, or is the field our foundation? I say unto you, Let us very carefully discharge our duty here today, for the Common Consent of the people is the matter that is being contested. 
46 I know that Micah does feel for the dignity of his city. Behold, long has Mentina been the center of our society. But behold, the voice of the people has brought about a change in things. Shall the tradition of our fathers supersede the Common Consent of the people? I hope that this shall not prove to be so, for it will become the ruination of all that we know. 
47 Behold, my city is new. Yea, Elak Kowa has seen scarcely two generations of habitation. Has it become a principal city because of its history? I think not. There has not been enough of it to warrant such an honor. What then? Does it contain men and women who are in any way greater or wiser than they who live in other cities? Again, I think not. We are all relations and none of us are ought different than the citizens of any of the cities of the Nem. 
48 What then has elevated Elak Kowa to become the capital of the nation? Behold, I will tell you. It is not because of wealth, neither is it because of greater knowledge or wisdom. Elak Kowa has become the gathering place of the Great Council only because of the Common Consent of the people. Behold, the people decided by vote that Elak Kowa should become the capital and if the people next week shall decide otherwise, then some other city would lay claim to this honor. 
49 It is not history or tradition or the law or the temple that decides these things, but the Common Consent of the people. For, it is because of the Common Consent that we may say that we have all things in common. Yea, it is by the Common Consent, is it not, that we have come out of Babylon, not because of the traditions of our fathers. For I would that you might recall that our lineage does not begin with Hagoth. Indeed, the Nephites were our fathers as well. Did they do all things by Common Consent? Behold, I say unto you, Nay. 
50 Micah would have us believe that the good of the nation hangs upon the privileges bestowed by history and tradition unto the city of Mentina. But I say unto you, The good and the future of our very way of life hangs not upon the good name and reputation of but one city, but rather upon the steadfastness of all the Nem in upholding the standard set by the founders of Mentina. If we bow to the will of one city and place it higher in stature than all the rest merely because of its history, then we shall have created a tyranny that shall destroy the nation. 
51 I do not plead that pre-eminence be given to my own city. Take the honor from Elak Kowa if having it shall create discord in the nation. Yea, give it to another city if having it shall threaten to puff its citizens up in the pride of their hearts! Nay, I do not beg for any such honor to dishonor the people of Elak Kowa. 
52 But behold, we ought to examine the reason that the honor was taken from Mentina and given unto another. Is Mentina unified? Do they have all things in common within their own city? Can a council be elected that shall not be divided against itself? Behold I say unto you, The city is split down the middle and there is contention on every corner. How then shall the rest of the nation rely upon a factious city to distribute equitably the sacred surplus of all the cities? 
53 For behold, does such division exist in any other city but Mentina? I say unto you, Nay. Examine every delegate in this council today and you will find no such division. But if Mentina and the high priest of Mentina is to have control over the general surplus, could that not become the means whereby that same division which does destroy the unity of Mentina might be spread from city to city? And is this wisdom? 
54 Wherefore, the wisdom of the General Councils is plainly manifest in its recommendation to the people that the surplus be transferred out of the center of the dispute. And the Councils did ask for the Common Consent of the people. Did the people consent to retain the surplus in the ancient capital? They did not. Behold, they saw clearly the threat to the public peace. 
55 There was no slight intended and no injury made upon the people of Mentina. But the security of the way of life which all the cities have chosen was of primary concern and the people did decide the best course of action. The people of Mentina are not forced to accept the Common Consent if they no longer wish to live by this law. Yea, they may leave the union and be a nation unto themselves if this is their desire, for the rest of the cities do not seek to impose that upon Mentina of which its citizens do not approve. Wherefore, where is the injury? 
56 And when Migdan Idi had made and end of speaking, behold, Micah was abashed. For he had supposed that the people had removed the capital to Elak Kowa in order to punish the people of Mentina because they had allowed the Tucantorites to remain in their midst. But this was not the case and when he had discovered that he suspected them in error, his eyes were opened to his own pride and to the pride of the city. Wherefore, he forebore from speaking any more in the council. 
57 But Hemeacum did stand to be recognized, saying: 
58 Behold, my companion has given up the matter, being altogether put down by the words of Migdan Idi. But I am not put down, nor discouraged from the cause. Mentina has indeed been injured and all her people with her. For there is but one authority on earth whereby the people ought to be governed. Let us be clear on this matter. Men may call councils and they may contrive to govern the kingdom of God as they see fit. But in all that they do, if they have not the mandate of heaven, they do err greatly. 
59 It is only upon the principles of the priesthood that the cities ought to be governed. When the people are in accord with those whom God calls into the ministry, they become of one heart and one mind with God, and they have all things in common. This principle is not based in carnal man and it is not founded on the laws of men. It is an eternal principle and any who tries to circumvent it does commit sin. It makes no difference whether such a one is an individual man or set of men, or even the whole nation. When the mandate of heaven is breached, surely the Lord will not hold the malefactor harmless. 
60 Migdan Idi asks where the injury is found. Is this not injury unto God, unto the city of Mentina and unto all the Nem together? Behold, the matter at hand will decide the doctrine by a vote of the people. Shall the people decide in this way the nature of God? I say unto you, All the councils of the nation could not change God in any way. How then, shall they change any other doctrine? 
61 The Law of Consecration is a principle given in the High Place. Therefore, it is not a political matter, but a doctrine of our religion. Shall the councils decide our doctrine for us? If so, what might prevent them from forming combinations to take away our ordinances and our observances? Behold, I say unto you, There is nothing to prevent the disintegration of our culture and our society, yea, it shall bring upon us a separation from God. This is the injury. 
62 Behold, God chose the city of Mentina as the seat of His church. Yea, He did cause that our forefathers should depart from the Land Southward and reestablish His church and His kingdom here in this blessed place. And He has blessed us beyond compare because we have followed Him. Shall we begin now to change His dictates and His commandments? 
63 By the voice of the people the center of the church has been moved to Elak Kowa. Because of this change, the general surplus, the means through which God does build up His church, has been taken from His chosen high priest. What shall we change next? 
64 This misconception has already changed one sound doctrine of the church and turned it to nonsense. When we give unto the mind and will of the people to dictate the doctrine of the church, we sentence our culture to extinction. 
65 And when Hemeacum had said these words, he surrendered the stand and took his seat. And when he had returned to his seat, Tso Tsit did stand up to be recognized, saying: 
66 Behold, I am Tso Tsit and I am a descendent of Hagoth. I do give all honor unto this council and I do stand to speak for the Nem. 
67 This question does concern me greatly. For, if Hemeacum is considered correct in his interpretation of things, then all that we do in the cities is in error. Wherefore, let us look at the manner in which we of the outlying cities have traditionally governed ourselves. 
68 Behold, the settlements are formed because some small group of Nem do chose to leave the city of their habitation and strike out into the wilderness to form other communities. And the new community does meet together and a Community Council is formed following the pattern given by our ancestors. 
69 Yea, we do ask our mothers to nominate the names of those they wish to sit in the council. And the people do vote on the names and they become the Community Council by the Common Consent of the people. And this council does elect a high priest from among the Peli of the families of the group to act as the keeper of the records and to have the care and keeping also of the surplus of the city. And now that the High Places are built in all the cities, it has also become part of the stewardship of the high priests and the Peli to have the keeping and the care of it and of the synagogues. 
70 Now, this has been the manner in which the Lord has called up men and women to serve the people ever since my city has been. And behold, we know that this custom has been passed down to us from generation to generation and it has also been confirmed by the records of our people which we do open and read often. 
71 Wherefore, we do believe that the Lord does call the Peli personally. It is from among the Peli that the Community Council does call the high priest. This high priest does call and train priests and teachers to serve in the churches, but they are also sustained by the people. 
72 Wherefore, as may be plainly seen, the Lord does call up His servants in our city by a set order. Now, Hemeacum, would you change all this which has gone on in our city since its inception? And if so, upon what grounds and by whose authority do you seek to dictate the beliefs and customs of a people who have been organized almost as long as the city of Mentina? I say unto you, Neither the people nor the high priest of Mentina have authority to dictate anything that is done in another place and among another people. 
73 But I also defy you to establish by the records that the city of Mentina has chosen its Community Council or it high priest in any other way. Behold, we know that you are of the Tucantorites and it is out of this doctrine that you derive your interpretation. It is a system of doctrine that is at variance with the rest of the Nem, even in your own city. Shall the Great Council be governed by a small group of Nem in one city, or shall the Common Consent be preserved? 
74 Let us decide first the manner in which this council shall govern itself. Shall we change our tradition because of the teaching of Tucantor, or shall we retain the Common Consent as we have understood it to this date? Let us vote on this matter before we proceed. 
75 And when Tso Tsit had made an end of speaking, he did take his seat again. And it did seem that he was correct in his call for a vote of the council, for how could any Great Council proceed without an agreement upon the basis and foundation of the council? Wherefore, I did call for a vote upon the question of Common Consent. And the delegates of the council did cast their lots and the vote fell upon the Common Consent. 
76 Behold, every delegate except Hemeacum did vote in favor of retaining the Common Consent as it had theretofore been interpreted. And when they had all cast their lots and I had counted the vote, I did give the lots to the scribe of the council to count and to record. And when the scribe had counted the votes also and witnessed the result, behold, Hemeacum did arise once again to be recognized, saying: 
77 Behold, I stand up before this council to protest the evil that you have thrust upon the Nem. You have circumvented the word and will of God. Do you suppose that this voting shall have changed anything in creation? I say unto you, It has not. There is nothing that men may do or say that can change the will of God. This Great Council does only teach the people that they may place themselves above the commandments and this is an evil that you will all carry with you and a sin which you must account for in the dreadful day of judgment. Yea, behold, I would not be any of you when you must stand before the Lord in that day. 
78 Now, let me instruct you, perchance you might wish to repent. When the Lord has spoken a thing through His chosen prophet, behold we may demonstrate our faith and loyalty unto Him by raising up our hands to sustain the words of the prophet of God. But shall we hear the voice of God through His prophet and elect through the Common Consent which of His commandments we will obey and which we will cast to the wind? 
79 But this is exactly what this council has done. Behold, the voice of the Lord has been heard already in this matter and the will of the Lord has already been spoken by His prophet. If any of you think that you can countermand any of his words, let him account for it unto God. 
80 And when Hemeacum had said these words, he left the council. Wherefore, I did ask Micah to stand and express his sentiments concerning the matter. And behold, he did arise from his seat and walk down even into the center of the council chamber. And he addressed the council, saying: 
81 Behold, I am not of the same religion as my fellow delegate and I do not agree with him in this matter. Of course, I do not believe that anything that we might say or do in this council will change anything in the creation and with regard to the will and word of the Lord, there is nothing that we can accomplish in the councils to change or circumvent the commandments of God. But the doctrine of Tucantor does corrupt even the half of the people of my city and they do believe it. I fear that they will not accept anything this council might decide. 
82 But I do believe in the rule of the Common Consent. Behold, I did cast my lot and if this council shall still consider me able to speak in behalf of at least that portion of the people of the city of Mentina who are not of the Tucantorites, then I shall be honored to remain in the council and do my duty to my city. 
83 And when Micah had said this, he resumed his seat. Wherefore, I did call for the voice of the council concerning the Common Consent, and behold, the council did elect to retain the practice of returning the decisions of the council unto the people for their sustaining vote. And when the vote was taken and recorded, I did arise from my seat and I did address the council, saying: 
84 The decision of the Great Council is that the Nem shall retain the traditions and customs of the councils with regard to the Common Consent. And that is, that matters shall be heard in the councils and when a decision has been reached, it shall be published to the people. Verily, the voice of the people shall decide whether a thing becomes the law of the land or not. 
85 Therefore, it was decided by the Great Council that one city shall not dictate to any other what their law might be, but that the Great Council shall give recommendations unto the cities and the people ought to decide what their laws shall be of themselves. 
86 And we did take up the doctrine of Tucantor to discuss it. And the delegates did discuss the matter for many days. And it was determined that no effort ought to be made to correct the Tucantorites by the law, but that those who felt their doctrine to be incorrect ought to diligently teach as the Spirit directed and that this ought to be the only action taken. Finally, when they had made an end of discussing the Tucantorites, I did call for a close of the Great Council with the admonition that all the delegates return unto their own cities and settlements and meet in their own councils to ascertain the will of the people. 
87 And within two months, word returned unto Elak Kowa from all the cities and settlements, and behold, the people did concur with the decision of the Great Council. Furthermore, the people of not a few cities did send me word by personal epistle of their approbation of the manner in which the council did conduct itself. 
88 But Micah did return again unto the people of Mentina and he did represent accurately all that had transpired at the council and behold, the people were divided in their response. The one half of them approved of the decisions of the Great Council and the other half denied the authority of the council to decide in anything. 
89 And the contention over doctrine did become hot in the city of Mentina, insofar that many of the people did begin to leave the city. Some set out to create new settlements and others moved to cities and settlements wherein their families dwelt. And that portion of the population Mentina who did not follow the teaching of Tucantor became the fewer than those who did. And behold, Micah was among those who took their families out of the conflict. 
90 For the Tucantorites were dogmatic in their insistence that all people believe as they did. Tucantor, their high priest, became as a king unto them. And he did dictate unto them all that they might do. And the men whom he did set up as the priests and teachers did also have the control over every aspect of the daily life of the people. And behold, the women ceased to do miracles and to be healers. 
91 Now, those who were not of the Tucantorites were required by the law to give all that they produced unto the high priest. And Tucantor did divide all between himself and the priests and teachers, returning only a portion again. Behold, this they called consecration and it became a law in the city. Wherefore, all those who did not render all their goods unto the high priest were punished and persecuted. 
92 And behold, unto those who believed on his doctrine, Tucantor returned a greater portion than he did unto those who did not. And, because the people were made to render all their goods and whatsoever they did produce unto the high priest, behold, there was never any surplus. Wherefore, when the practice of Tucantor did create beggars of those that believed not his doctrine, the people ceased to feel responsible for them and they did nothing for them. Therefore, they were forced to leave the city with scarcely even the clothing on their backs. 
93 And I did send an epistle unto Tucantor, who had become high priest in Mentina just as he had prophesied. And I entreated him on behalf of those of the citizens of Mentina who differed from him in their beliefs. Yea, I did send him an epistle, saying: 
94 Tucantor, high priest of Mentina, I am Shioni Akek, high priest of Elak Kowa. I do send you greetings from the Nem. And behold, I do inquire of you after the safety and well being of the Nem of your city. For I have heard report of many that the Nem do suffer greatly for want in Mentina. 
95 Behold, I would entreat you, that if the Nem are no longer welcome in Mentina, to the effect that they are persecuted and punished for their beliefs, do allow them to bring their belongings even up into Elak Kowa, that we might care for our own in the manner of our tradition. 
96 But do cease to persecute our relations in your city. For this is not the way of the Lord, nor of His righteousness. And if you do purport to be His prophet, I would exhort you, for the good of all your people, that you set not this example for them. Behold, the Lord shall not hold you harmless in this evil. 
97 And behold, Tucantor was wroth with me because of the epistle and he did answer me, saying: 
98 Behold, Shioni Akek, I am the high priest of all the land and my people are the Nem. Yea, there are none in the land who may call themselves after this name save they be believers in the doctrine which the Lord has revealed unto me. Do not, therefore, write unto me as if you do speak the mind of the Nem. For you are a non-believer and have no authority. And also you have taken the honor of high priest unto yourself, being not called of God by His own oracle, as was Aaron. 
99 As for those in my city who are unbelievers, do not concern yourself with them. Behold, they keep not the statutes and commandments of God and, therefore, they have no place or station in Mentina. We may treat them as we will, for they are not to be considered citizens. Behold, they shall either conform to the doctrine or they shall leave the city. 
100 And whether any of their belongings shall be forfeit, that I alone shall decide. For behold, God has placed the city in my hands to do with as He shall dictate. Do not think to dictate to me what I ought to do and believe not that you have any wisdom that you might teach me concerning the ways of God. Behold, I am his prophet and mouthpiece. Those who go against me also go against God. 
101 And behold, this was the manner of his epistle unto me. Wherefore, I did worry for the people of Mentina, but most of all I did worry for the Nem left in the city. For behold, I knew that they did suffer greatly for lack of the necessities of life, and there were still many little children among them. 
102 Wherefore, I did send another epistle unto Tucantor, saying: 
103 Tucantor of Mentina, I am Shioni Akek, high priest of Elak Kowa and I greet you for all Nem. Listen to the words of my entreaty. For, are we not neighbors and shall we not treat one with another as brothers? Wherefore, take no offense at my offering, for it is given with good intention. 
104 Behold, the families of those that remain in Mentina who are not of your belief do cry out for the safety of their loved ones. I beseech you to allow them to gather their goods and leave the city. Behold, we shall succor them, wherefore, let them take up the bundle and depart out of your midst and persecute them not. 
105 And behold, he did send a messenger to answer me and these are the words of the messenger: 
106 Do not treat with me as a neighbor and brother, Shioni Akek, for we are neither. 
107 Now, he did address me in this manner because of his belief that the women of the Nem were become proud and that they had subjected the men under their yoke to be commanded in all things by them. And this manner of address was intended to insult me, but behold, I took no offense. And the messenger continued, saying: 
108 I know what is the desire of your heart. Behold, you do not esteem the persons you would steal from Mentina nearly so dear as you do esteem their goods and possessions. Wherefore, cease to incite the people to abandon their home, for they are Nem of Mentina, not of Elak Kowa. Behold, I shall consider any such incitement as hostilities against us and we shall defend ourselves from such hostilities. 
109 And from that point Tucantor allowed no one to leave Mentina, but kept all the people captive. Now, this suited the majority, for the more part of the people were become Tucantorites and they were content. But those who believed not in the absolute power of the high priest were deprived of their liberty and they were forced into labor for the Tucantorites. 


CHAPTER 5 
1 And it did not take much time for the news of the outrage of Mentina to reach the ears of the families and friends of those whom Tucantor had imprisoned there. And they were wroth with the people of Mentina and with the high priest in particular, insomuch that they did gather in the cities and settlements closest unto Mentina. 
2 And a particularly large body of people did gather at Elak Kowa. And the people did call for the Great Council to take up the matter of the immediate relief of the Nem of Mentina. And it was the decision of the Council that I should write an epistle one last time unto Tucantor and request that he release the Nem from the city, that they might gather with their own people in other places. 
3 And behold, I did write an epistle unto Tucantor, even according to the will of the people, saying: 
4 Behold, Tucantor, I write unto you from the city of Elak Kowa for and in behalf of all the Nem of the mountains. And I do request that you let the Nem come out of the city of Mentina. Yea, let them come out from Mentina and join their families in other places. 
5 For, it is clear that you do not esteem them as you ought. Yea, because that they are of other beliefs and customs than you, they are made slaves in their own city, even the city which they have built up with their own hands. Therefore, release them that they may take their beliefs into another place. 
6 It is not good that you should shut them up and keep them in bondage. Behold, do you not know that a great multitude has gathered here in the valley of Meninta because of your determination to hold the Nem hostage in their own home? And do you not fear that this steadfastness in your wickedness shall bring upon your city the wrath of all the people? Come, Tucantor, put aside your pride and let the people come out. 
7 Behold, I am commissioned by the people to tell you that if you do not open up the city and allow the Nem to depart from out of it in peace, verily, the people shall descend upon you and take them out by force. And never before has such a thing been in all the history of this land since the days of Father Hagoth. Do you wish to be known in all the land as one who brings down the peace and sows the seeds of death and destruction? Yea, the first of your race to do such things, you shall leave an inheritance unto your children that will win them the onus of all the world. 
8 Wherefore, cousin and brother, seek reason! Open up the gates of the city and let the people go! 
9 And behold, Tucantor answered him, saying: 
10 Behold, we know that we are righteous and the Lord has chosen us because we do steadfastly adhere unto His word and His commandment. And we do also know that you have stirred the people up against Mentina because of your wickedness. For you are of the ways and wickedness of the Nehors, teaching to all people that they may decide for the Lord what is right and what is wrong. Behold, you shall not prosper in this wickedness and must repent. 
11 For you do teach that all people may discern the mind and will of God and we know this to be false. For, He has always called up prophets to serve Him and to be His mouthpiece upon the earth. But you teach that all people may approach His holy throne and impose upon Him in all things. Behold, you must repent of this evil. 
12 And we also know that you do teach the people that they may form councils and act in the name of God. To act in His holy name requires His authority. Do you not know that He does not give this authority except by the word of His mouth unto His servant the prophet? Behold, you call up your priests and your prophets by the word of the people. Wherefore, how can you declare yourself high priest? You are nothing but a puppet of the people. 
13 And again, your councils are called up by women. This is an abomination before God. Do you not read the scriptures? Do you not recall that Adam is the head of Eve? Wherefore then, do your women act as the head of the body? 
14 But, we do acknowledge that you have greater strength in your wickedness than we have in our righteousness. Wherefore, we will release the wicked into your hands. Do with them as you will but do not expect good to come of them. For they are full of sloth and are unprofitable. They are the most idle of the people, wherefore, take them and do with them as you will. 
15 But behold, they shall not take out of the city any possession. For we are the chosen of the Lord and have all things in common. Wherefore, how can they take from the city ought that does not belong to them? Let not anyone think that these idlers may rob from the industrious because that they will not hearken unto the Lord and unto His prophet. 
16 And this was the language with which Tucantor did abuse Shioni in his epistle. But behold, Shioni did not allow his wrath to be kindled against Tucantor, but he did rejoice that the people of Mentina were to be allowed to come out of the city without that the people of Meninta should have to rise up with force of arms to take them out. 
17 Behold, it was not the desire of Shioni that all people should agree with him or with the majority. Rather, he only wanted the freedom of the people to move away from that which did enslave them. Wherefore, he did rejoice that he had obtained the freedom of the people. 
18 Now, when the people of Mentina who were prisoners there were allowed to come out of the city, they were miserable indeed. For Tucantor had ordered that they be flogged and stripped of their clothing before they were allowed to depart. And they presented a scene of woe and despair as they proceeded through the deriding shouts of the people in their naked and miserable state. And the wicked people of the city, who had once been their brethren, did cast stones at them as they passed, and many were injured. 
19 And the people who had gathered in to succor them took blankets and covered them as they passed out of the gates of the city. And they gave them wine to drink and food to eat. For behold, many had not eaten in many days and some were dying for want of food or drink. 
20 And the angry wrath of the people was kindled against Mentina because of the miserable state of the refugees. But Shioni did calm them and they brought the sufferers down unto Elak Kowa to nurture and to comfort them. 
21 And the priests of Elak Kowa did go straightway even unto the archives in the mountains and they did gather together all the records of the people quickly, lest Tucantor take possession of them too. And they did leave copies in the archives, but they did also take out all the histories of the people since Hagoth came out of the Land Southward, that they might not be lost to the people because of the wickedness of the high priest and the people of the city of Mentina. 
22 And the mothers of Elak Kowa called upon me to convene a Great Council again to discuss what must be done. And I did call for a Great Council and delegates from out of all the peoples who called themselves Nem came to the Council. 
23 And when the delegates from every city were gathered, I did call for a count of the delegates. And these are cities that sent delegates unto the Great Council at Elak Kowa: 
24 Phaynith-Im and Phenith of the new settlement of Phenith Ee-It; Midgan-Idi and Da-In of Elak Kowa; Kamiakim and Toniah Lotnah of Potal; Nohonaya and Pa Sineth of the city of Elgiah; Parah and Nomiah-Min, of the city of Pagwit, which is also called Michim-Mic; Monoriah and Mineat of Hagoth; Pingwit and Kayith of Sevim; Pa Wayat and Panah-Nin of the women’s refuge of Korinah; Ealekoet Akek and Kochets Kunnin of Nespelem; Peliah and Beleuh of the Pahshi settlement of Porinor; Tlin Gee-it and Tso-Tsit of the city of Tliningsah and of Haydats; Rhen and Kaboret of the city of Witchittim and Kodahah; Megnem and Pa-In-Nah Waylit of Corianton and Winebag. 
25 And there were many cities of the Nem represented, but these were the delegates that were chosen to hear the matter. 
26 And the Great Council of Elak Kowa determined that the city of Mentina had committed a great evil upon its own people, insofar that the Council recommended to all the Nem that Mentina be no more considered part of the Nem of the Mountains or of the Plains and the Lakes. Yea, the Council recommended that there should be no more trade of the surplus of the Nem to the city of Mentina and its inhabitants. And they did also recommend that the old city be no longer recommended to the sojourner or the traveling sage, for it had become perilous to anyone who believed not the doctrine of Tucantor. 
27 And when word went out from the Council and the Common Consent of the people was sought, behold, the voice of the people did rise up in condemnation of the people of Mentina. And the recommendation of the Great Council held, and Mentina was cut off. And when this was published throughout all the land, many families did come out of Mentina secretly and did also join with their people in other cities. 
28 And Mentina did at once become an impoverished place. For, without the surplus of the Nem, who was left to support the priests and the teachers? Yea without the support of the surplus, Tucantor had not great riches at his disposal and all the people were made poor. And they had not all things in common and they did contend with one another to find trade and to sell their wares and their produce. For the Nem did no longer find use for their goods and avoided the city altogether. 
29 And the Council of Elak Kowa did also meet to discuss the outcome of the Great Council. For Elak Kowa was only a day’s ride from Mentina and it was very close to the place where Tucantor had begun the division of the Nem of Mentina. And the Council decided to make preparations for all of the inhabitants who wished to follow them to depart out of the valley of Meninta and go even up to Nespelem. 
30 And the people did also give their Common Consent to this plan and great preparations were made ready. It was determined that, when the snow melted and the ice passed from off of the rivers in the following spring, the people of Elak Kowa would be no more and they would take of all their goods, and their houses, and their animals, and all manner of things with which they did administer their stewardships, even up into the north country. Yea, and it was the plan of the people to make a new settlement near unto Nespelem and Potal. 
31 For behold, the people of Elak Kowa would not live in the same place as a city of people who would do wickedness such as the Tucantorites had done unto the people of Mentina. Nay, they would not have such people as their neighbors. Wherefore, they made great preparations to leave the valley. 
32 And it was to the great surprise of the people of Elak Kowa that their council did receive an epistle from Tucantor and from the priests and teachers of Mentina. And in this epistle the people of Mentina did beg the people of Elak Kowa to remain in the valley and continue to be their neighbors and allies. But the Nem have always avoided the Gadianton Robbers and they have always shunned them and worked to shelter their people from them. And if this was the way of the people concerning the Gadianton Robbers, who conspired daily to overthrow all that is good, how then could they do otherwise with the Tucantorites, who had conspired to take away the liberty of the land and of the people? 
33 And in the space of the remainder of the summer, and with the passing of winter the people, having made all manner of preparations, took up their burdens and removed out of the valley of their forefathers, just as Nephi of old took his people out of the place of their first inheritance in the Land Southward because his brethren did conspire to destroy the people. 
34 And the whole of the north of the valley of Meninta, as well as half the habitations in the south of the valley were made desolate at once. And houses were left empty and became the habitation of vermin. And farms were left unworked and unplanted. And shops were left unattended and warehouses were left barren. 
35 And the people of Mentina were disrupted in all that they did. For, of a necessity they were forced to take up much more work than that to which they were accustomed. And this was a sore trial for them, for the Tucantorites had become enamored with the idleness that the new doctrine allowed them. But Tucantor, seeing the ruin of his city, ordered them to take up once again the plow and the hammer. 
36 For, with three quarters of the production necessary to feed the populace of Mentina and to support them in the manner which they had chosen gone out of the land, it became expedient for Tucantor to press the remaining people into labor. 
37 And even the priests, who had tasted of the leisure of their callings, were made to take up all manner of work with their hands. And the priests were brought low again because of the impending hunger that they knew would fall upon the city because of the lack of production and of trade. Surely, in but one season Mentina was reduced to the poorest and hungriest of the cities of the Land Northward. 
38 And the people of Mentina complained bitterly against their high priest. Yea, they were wroth with him because of the disaster he had brought upon them. And they did hold him responsible for all of their woes. For they had thought to become rich with the surplus of all the cities, and this because of the many things he had promised them. But now they were the poorest and most wretched of people in all the land. 
39 For, whereas in the year before the ascension of Tucantor to the seat of high priest, the city of Mentina might have been called the richest and best supplied city of all the Nem, yet in one year it had been reduced to the poorest. 
40 And Tucantor discovered that it was difficult to press his people into service one for another after that they had made prisoners and slaves of their neighbors. Yea, he found his flock troublesome to shepherd when the Nem had gone from out of the land. 
41 And the people that had once loved that their neighbors had once provided for them did quickly become idlers. Wherefore, it was doubly difficult for them to take up a greater portion of work than they had been accustomed to do even before they had sustained Tucantor in his wickedness. Yea, they were sore pressed to do even enough to survive, let alone to provide any surplus at all. 
42 And behold, the greater portion of the valley lay desolate and empty. And the fields went fallow and were not planted. And the streets were not filled with people plying their trades. And the warehouses were not filled even enough for the people who remained to pass through the winter without want. 
43 And thus, a beautiful age of peace and prosperity ended for the valley of Meninta and all its inhabitants. Yea, the people began to flee in haste and in secret, for they feared that another winter in Mentina might devour them. And the city of Mentina was reduced to scarcely two hundred souls. 


CHAPTER 6 
1 Now, Tucantor’s religion did not spread quickly from its beginning in Mentina. And this is in part because of the removal of the more part of the people out of the valley of Meninta, and also in part because the people of the Land Northward have ever been concerned with that manner of living whereby the individual may come out of Babylon and see the face of Christ. Tucantor did continue to teach the people that they could not do this but by the power of his priesthood and this did deter many from any interest in the system. 
2 But the doctrine did find interest in the cities down by the gulf of the sea in the south. In those places where there was still some remnant of the people who were left in the land after the great Nephite war with the Lamanites, many people saw in it a way to bring their neighbor into subjection and the doctrine grew in the south. 
3 And before many years had passed, the city of Hagoth was overtaken by the Tucantorites. And Tucantor, himself, did remove to the city of Hagoth and he did rule that city as he had Mentina. But behold, not all the people could be controlled by this new doctrine and there was strife between those that believed the new thing and those that believed it not. 
4 And Tucantor sent armed men out to battle against those that believed not and his enemies prevailed for a season. They did beat the Tucantorites in battle and took captive their priests and even their high priest himself. But they did not wish the destruction of the newcomers. For Hagoth had stood nearly empty for some time and the people who had gone back into that country to inhabit the old cities there desired that their population might grow somewhat. 
5 Wherefore, they did make a treaty with the Tucantorites that they might live together peacefully. And in this treaty they arranged that the Tucantorites might occupy the sacred places and have the ordering of them for half the year and in the other half of the year the ordering of the sacred places and of the surplus, was left to the original inhabitants. And upon this peace they did all agree, and the priests were released. 
6 But Tucantor was old and did not return to rule over his people. For he was taken roughly from his bed when his opponents overcame his armies and he was carried off into a secret place in the wilderness. And this was done in order that the Tucantorites could be held to their covenant. But behold, Tucantor died of a sudden in the secret place and his people did mourn his death. 
7 And in the city of Hagoth, and in the settlements round about, they have two religions and two councils and two bodies of priesthood in every place. And they build up their high places and they have all things in a duality. And it is a wonder that such a system holds together at all. But they do prosper after their own fashion and who are we to judge them. Behold, if they have found a way to live peaceably then they have done a good thing. 
8 It was in this way that the doctrine of Tucantor was preserved in the land, and his followers also. For, they could not have prevailed long in Mentina. It is true, they had the run of the valley. But they could not sustain anything more than a camp there without the help of its neighbors. Wherefore, Tucantor built up a city and a doctrine and it carried on in his name in the city of Hagoth. 
9 And by treaty with their neighbors, and a kind of Common Consent, the Tucantorites continued in the land and built up their population. For, without the help and cooperation of a goodly number of people, the priests could not have lived as they wished and held up the standard which Tucantor had given them. Without someone to do their work for them and to provide for them, they could not have survived for long without modifying their purpose. This they did achieve by agreement with the people of Hagoth. 
10 But they did not enjoy any season of peace. For, the people who had taken to living in the old cities of Hagoth were remnants of that Great War that ravished the whole land in the time of my father. Yea, they were Lamanites and Gadianton Robbers who had not returned unto the Land Southward. And although they had lost the lust for constant bloodshed, yet were they a jealous and deceitful people. And one settlement made war on another and each city held its own law. And they had the constant necessity of defending themselves and their provender from their neighbors. 
11 And the people were quarrelsome and dangerous. Yea, and they were difficult to control. But, because the Tucantorites had adopted the need to control their fellow man, this became to them their motivation. They worked to control the hearts of all the people of that region and this did constrain them from much preaching in other places. And their doctrine remained in but one place. 
12 But behold, because they had left the valley of Meninta, some of the Nem did return again and begin to build up the settlements again and to have the keeping and the care of the archives there. And Mentina was once again numbered among the Nem because of the removal of the Tucantorites. 
13 And the Nem did rejoice that the place of their father’s choosing was once again held by the pure in heart. But, I must tell you, Mentina was never again a principal city of the Nem of the mountains and the records were copied and carried away into the north countries, notwithstanding the libraries did remain ever hidden in their safe places in Meninta. 
CHAPTER 7 
1 Now, it has been seven years since the Tucantorites removed from Mentina down even unto the city of Hagoth and the valley of Meninta has recovered somewhat from the division that Tucantor caused. And Elak Kowa has been resettled by my brother and his family. But behold, it is as if the valley does remember the great hurt done there upon the peace that once dwelt in it. Yea, some say the valley mourns. 
2 And Nespelem has become the capital city of the Nem of the Mountains. And behold, when I did relocate my people even up into the mountainous places surrounding the great canyon of Wallohitwah, the people of the city did welcome us and beg us to come down unto it to dwell. But there were too many of us. Wherefore, we did divide into five hosts and we did choose new places to settle. 
3 But I did take my family and go down into Nespelem and my wife’s people did take us into their own houses for a season. And they did also assist us in building our own houses and we did take up our stewardship among them. 
4 And when the winter had come, we were once again warm in houses of our own. Yea, we were safe from the wind and the blast of the mountain snows because of the goodness and the charity of the Nem. And they did even more than this. For, before the winter was over, the people of Nespelem did entreat me to be their high priest and I did accept the honor. 
5 Now, look at us and declare to me how that we are so different from the Tucantorites. Did they not also leave the contested place and go away into another city? And were they not also welcomed in by the people after a fashion? And was their peculiar doctrine not also preserved in the land? Wherefore, are we not alike, our two peoples? 
6 But behold, they did go with war in their hands and wickedness in their hearts. Behold, they were beaten by their adversaries and were made to agree to live in peace by extortion. We did not go with war in our hands and wickedness in our hearts. We were taken in by the people with fullness of charity. We had no need to lift up the sword in defense of our way of living and no need to defend ourselves at all. We feared not for our survival in the new place and had no need of compromise. Wherefore, I discern that we are different indeed from our brethren the Tucantorites. Surely, theirs shall always be a life of war and turmoil, where ours will ever be one of peace and prosperity. 
7 And, though our circumstances be on the surface similar, yea, though we both became a migratory people, cast out from our own place and in search of a new place wherein we might dwell and prosper, yet how different are we in principle and in consequence. 
8 For we feared not at all that we would not survive as a people. Yea, we knew the disposition of the people in the land whereunto we removed ourselves. And before the snows flew and covered the ground, we dwelt in homes of our own and our granaries were filled. 
9 And in Nespelem we found family and clan. We found our own people and they welcomed us in. This is Nem and the way of the Nem. Dare I boast of such blessings? Yet shall I, for I discern that many who do read our history might wish for such things in their own lives. Yea, I shall make so bold as to suggest that we were blessed indeed. 
10 And when we were settled, our high priests and Peli did gather all the people together that lived in the region round about Nespelem. Yea, and though the snow lay on the ground, we did all dance a dance together to give thanks for the snows and to retain in our hearts a communion with our ancestors. For behold, we now lived in a place that depended upon the moisture in the winter to sustain it in the summer. And we did dance upon the ground, yea, even upon our knees. And we did sing to the sacred directions. And we did cast ourselves upon the Earth and ask a blessing upon her and upon all living things. 
11 This new thing did we to commemorate all that we had learned and all that we had sacrificed in order that we might peacefully retain the ways and customs and blessings of the Nem. This we did as a token of our thanksgiving unto the Lord for all that we had received from Him and in all that He had prospered us. 
12 And while we were thus employed, my wife’s grandmother, even the most ancient one, was overcome by the Spirit and she did break forth in a song. And the Holy Ghost whispered to me that this song would also come into the minds of our descendents in a distant time as they also began again to give thanks for all that their ancestors had done for them. And when Grandmother Akek finished with her singing, we did all learn the words of the song, and we did dedicate it to our children, and our children’s children. And these are the words of the song: 
Tay-ahk Nu-unim, 
Hay-eetay-weet-kaynim Kay Pah-aynin Wee-seet-tsay, Nu-unim Way-eet-tays. 
It is with thanksgiving we come into this our place today. 
Kay-kohne-em Nu-unim, Tee-teelu-layct Heepay-waykt-ee-ee-yay 
Teemkt-nee-eenekt. 
It was the stewardship of our thankful ancestors. 
Kohnah Kee-yay, 
Nahmah-ahtalah-pusah-kekt Pah-aynin Wee-see-eets Keen-ee-eepekt. 
We come to this place with thanksgiving. 
Hee-eetay-wee-say Kee-yay Nu-unim, Yay-lee-ay-layin. 
It is sacred and of value to us, our work. 
Kay-heet-eeyay-sowks Nu-unim Chee-eekeen Ku-chee-stee-tay 
Way-chay-nep-tay-ayin. 
That which echoes in our words and in our songs… 
Chu-yayp-ku-chay Way-chee-eetay Cheem-ee-eem 
Hee-eemtay-chekt-toksayn-ay Keen-yay Yay-lay-yay nay. 
Naturally, we have them, for they are in this work also. 
Ku-us Kee-eechee-eetay 
Tee-toh-ohkahn-cha-ahweet. 
Thus, it is indeed the way of the People. 
Kohnah Pee-ee-kayps-snahweet Nu-unim Chee-nay-chee-hee-nayseeks… 
They are the strength that we take into ourselves. 
Ku-us Kay-lah Chahm 
Chee-see-ee-lay-ept Wee-eetays. 
As all of you who sleep in the Earth have done this. 
Chee-nee-eek-chu-kay Neeyee-sayp Tah-lay-pu-usah. 
Even they who worship differently do the same. 
Kay-tu Kah-ah Yohks Kee-ee 
Helah-wah-teem-sah. 
It is a Sacred Talk. 


CHAPTER 8 
1 And we did begin again, even as our father Hagoth began again, except that the land was filled with Nem and we were not a lonely people. And our city did grow and we called it Elak Kowa, in commemoration of the place from which we had come. 
2 And Mentina, which means “Place of Salt” was emptied almost entirely of people. Yea, seldom did many people ever live again in the valley during all the days of my life and my stewardship. But the Nem kept a small settlement there near unto the Archives to guard them and to keep them. And my brother made an attempt to reestablish Elak Kowa, but he did not succeed in his desire. Yea, he did return ere long to Elak Kowa and we did welcome him in again. 
3 But, in my day, the valley of Meninta was an empty and lonesome place. Yea, the meadows and fields returned unto expanses of willows and breaks, and they were filled with wild animals. 
4 And the water filled up the cisterns and overflowed. And the tanks were broken and the catchments thrown down. Yea, all the water rushed headlong down the streams and into the lake. And none of it watered the fields. Wherefore, the vineyards and the orchards did dry up. 
5 And the houses made of wood did wither and crack, for there was no one there to oil them. And the thatch of the roofs did blow in the wind, for there was no one there to mend them. And the shutters did fly from off the windows, for there was no one there to see to them in the storm. 
6 And the streets, which had been well beaten and sealed with fish meal and oil, dried and cracked. Yea, the wind did blow upon the streets and the sun did beat upon them and they became dust and melted away. And the trees that lined them and the gardens that adorned them withered and died. 
7 And the High Place stood out on the hill, alone of all, the only thing cared for in any way in the city. And, I am told, it also begins to fade away because of disuse and the lack of attention. 
8 Yea, only the sun and the wind frequent the High Place in Mentina. And it is a lonesome place. Its tree lined streets are no more, for the trees have all died. Its beautiful gardens are withered and gone. There are only dusty ruins of foundations on the hill and the lake, being filled up with the floods, has claimed all the houses below. 
9 Yea, and because it is the custom of the people to build with wood almost entirely, the sun and the wind have dried them up and they are speedily taken with fire in the season of thunder. And the lake has swallowed up and consumed all others. Yea, though the tall buildings are still visible above the waters, how can they stand when their foundations and first walls are flooded? 
10 For the water that sustained Mentina was carefully managed. Yea, it flowed down out of the mountains every year and the people did catch this water carefully and use it, wisely directing its flow so that all the land could be watered as a garden. But, when the people are all gone the system did not function, in but one season it was destroyed and the water found its own way again. And the garden withered and blew away. Yea, Mentina is become a waste place. 
11 And the orchards and vineyards have all dried up and give no more fruit because there is no water brought unto them. And the garden place that was Meninta is returned to a state fit only to be an outpost of the Nem. 
12 But the Nem do continue to prosper in the North Country and over toward the West Sea. And also in the plains the Nem do continue to gain and prosper. And in the land of Corianton, away to the North in the Lake Country, the Nem still have all things in common, for they are of one heart and one spirit. Notwithstanding, they do continue to recede into the forests, for there are Gadianton Robbers again in the land. 
13 But they do continue to send delegates up to Elak Kowa to the Great Councils when they are deemed necessary, and we do continue in trade and in communion with them from time to time. 
14 And we do also receive from time to time emissaries from the Nem of the Islands. Yea, they do also send us ambassadors, for they desire not that we should become a sundered people. They know of our doing and we are kept appraised of theirs, insofar that we do feel as thought there were no great ocean between us. They are our kin and kindred and we do keep our association with them. 
15 And we do receive, though less frequently than in times past, envoys from the countries that lie far to the west across the sea, even toward Jerusalem of old. But, it is as I say, their visits are much fewer now than in times past and the news which they bring to us is not at all good. 
16 For, it seems that many people do follow strange traditions that do not edify. And yet others seek only to enslave their fellow men. This news does fill us with sorrow for the people of the world. We do pray for all people and hope for them that they may also live as we do, but it does appear to be a difficult thing to do. But we, the Nem, do it. I may be arrogant in my assumption, for I certainly have not traveled in all the world. But, from the reports that come to us from other lands, the Nem do live a different law and we think a better law than the world chooses to live. 
17 And this way that we live is so important to us that we will not suffer ourselves to remain in the company of they who seek to take away our peace. It was for this cause that we left our homes in the Land Southward when our forefathers saw in visions the coming ruin of the Nephites. And it was also for this reason that I did take my own people out of the place of our home and brought them up into the land of Nespelem and of Potal. For we would not that our children might come into the wickedness of Tucantor. 
18 For, what does it profit us to remain in the midst of neighbors who will enslave their own people? Shall we always be strong enough to overcome them? Or might we some day have been enslaved by them also? But this is the thing that I would not conscience for my children. And I did make my plans to remove myself from out of Meninta. And behold, when I had made my own plans, all the people were of like mind and they did follow me into the mountainous north country. 
19 For the Tucantorites were not so much unlike the Gadianton Robbers to us. And we knew that we could not reason with them. But, could we take up the sword and slay them as our forefathers did? I say unto you, Nay. For the Lord our God did not command it as He did with them. 
20 Therefore, since we could not teach them, and the Lord had set Himself against slaying them, we did decide that it was better to leave the land and get ourselves out of Meninta completely. 
21 And it is a good thing that we did. For when wickedness is taken up in the hearts of men, it is hardly cleansed out of them when there are many who have taken it up and made it a standard unto themselves. Yea, when it has taken over the governance of a city, it can hardly be cleansed except that the Lord does make such a cleansing. But what men might do it? Surely not we, who love peace. 
22 For it is much better that we go to a place of peace, where our hearts may be at peace, than to remain in a place of conflict. Yea, for fear will have attracted to us they who are filled with fear. And anger will have attracted to us they who are filled with wrath. And could we have escaped the necessity of war had we remained in Meninta? That I cannot say. I hope that we might have. But the memory of the awful wickedness and the persecution wrought upon our relations, who had for a time been enslaved by the Tucantorites, did harrow us up in the remembrance of all that my father did teach us about the Great War between the Nephites and the Lamanites. 
23 And there was none among the Nephites who were not harrowed up in the souls with wrath and fear. And they were ruled by wrath, for they went from the shedding of blood to the shedding of blood. And behold, every man and every woman did sleep upon their swords. And they did lay themselves down upon the ground at night and await the coming of the dawn in anticipation of the next day’s atrocities. And behold, were not the Nephites brothers to the Lamanites even as the Tucantorites were our brothers? 
24 And I do deem that it was better that we did make our departure out of the land, rather than remain and eventually become overrun in all our settlements and cities with Tucantorites and the doctrine of Tucantor. 
25 For to stay would have brought war. Yea, to stay would have brought war between brothers. For they would not be taught and they were determined to rule over the people. Wherefore, there must have been great war ere long if we had stayed in the valley. For, they did covet the product of the valley and the fruits of the labors of all men. And we did deem it better to take it all away into another place. 
26 But this is not all. We did also depart out of our homeland because it was clear to us that the people of Mentina would surely have enslaved us even as they had enslaved their own brethren and neighbors. And, valuing our freedoms, we did take our journey and came up out of Meninta, leaving the Tucantorites to support themselves as best they might without the production of their neighbors, and without any trade. 
27 And before much time had passed, the Tucantorites were forced to leave the valley of Meninta as well. They did also depart out of the valley and leave it a wasteland. 
28 And thereafter, the city of Mentina was never again known as a great city of the Nem, but the libraries were maintained and the people still travel there to study in peace. It has become a solitary place, a place of stillness. Yea, I may say that there is still a good purpose in Mentina, but it is not the same as it once had been. It is a memorial and a reminder of what shall become of all the Nem if they sin against those precious things which God does give us because of our determination to serve Him and our neighbor. 
29 For there is little conflict there now. The Tucantorites have all left it and gone into the East and into the South countries. Yea, the struggle is gone out of the land and it is a solitary place. 
30 And we live in peace and tranquility in the mountains because that we did choose a better way. We did choose to depart out of the conflict and out of the threat of war. For, we could have remained and fought for our way of life, but none of us desired to engage in the needless work of death that war with the Tucantorites would have become. And the cities and settlements of Meninta were so connected that any breach would have eventuated much hardship on all. Wherefore, a breach must surely have come, and war hard on its straps. 
31 And the Nem are a peaceable people and we teach the peaceable things of the kingdom. Wherefore, we did choose to take the course of Nephi of old and remove ourselves from out of the conflict. Yea, even as Nephi did gather his people and remove out of the land into another place, so too did we remove ourselves from the conflict even before it could grow into war. 
32 This is the resolution that we chose, and by the Common Consent of the people we did chose it. Yea, with one heart and one voice we did pack up all that we had and we did remove ourselves from out of the land. And we deemed this the best course to take. For, though each of us was harrowed up in our hearts, yea, our souls were kindled with thoughts of anger and fear because of that which the Tucantorites had done unto their own relations, yet we did not wish to build our foundation upon war. We did not wish our lives and our nation to become founded on the shedding of blood and the rendering of evil unto every evil. 
33 For we had often heard my father speak, and also we did hear the words of those who also escaped the utter destruction of the Nephites, concerning the awful state of mind which did overcome the participants in that Great War which snuffed out an entire nation. Yea, there was not one person who did not sleep upon the sword and awful were the end of those days. And even the youths did learn the work of death and to live by the oaths of their mouths. 
34 And in leaving our homeland we do chose a path that is better for us. For we are a peaceable people, a people of healing, and there was none of us who wished to become a people of war. Surely, had we stayed and had we made an attempt to bend the Tucantorites to our law and to our way, we shall have corrupted even the good of it with fear and with anger. Shall our way have escaped some change in its character because of such proximity to the object of that fear and that anger? Or are we so different from all other people that we might believe ourselves immune to that which the thoughts of our own minds and the feelings of our own hearts must have surely brought upon us? 
35 Yea, of a surety had we taken up the fear and the anger and given place for them in our hearts, shall we not have become defined by that fear and that anger? Is it possible that we, who are built upon a foundation of healing, could have escaped the change in our hearts that must result when a doctrine of fear is taken up? Nay, we would have become that which we most feared. We would have set a standard wholly unlike that which our forefathers gave us and the Nem would have been no more. Yea, just as surely as the Nephites did destroy themselves as a nation, so shall the Nem of the Mountains have been destroyed, and just as completely. 
36 And the Lord did not guide us but to depart out of the land. For He knows the end from the beginning and the result of our staying was plain before Him. Wherefore, we could have been confident in remaining in the Meninta had He commanded it. But behold, I say unto you, He made no such revelation to us, neither singly or as a body. Wherefore, since it was not His will that we stay and rid the land of the Tucantorites, we deemed it wise to depart out of it. 
37 Yea, in order that we might always act and live in accordance with the word and will of God, I did determine to remove my family and all who would follow me out of the land and go up into the north country to dwell with our relations there. And behold, all the people, save the Tucantorites, did choose to go with me also. And I felt as my father and my grandfather must have felt leading a great body of people. Yea, the people made me their captain and I did lead them out of bondage and out of slavery. 


CHAPTER 9 
1 The nation which is known as Nem of the Mountains is united with the nation which is known as the Nem of the Plains, as also it is united with the nation which is known as the Nem of the Lakes. And we do begin to be sundered somewhat in the languages which we speak. Nevertheless, an ingenious method of communication has been devised whereby those of us who do travel much between the three great nations might speak to one another without discord. 
2 For, many of our words are similar, but the manner in which we use them has changed and become sundered. The common tongue of the people is not the same as the written language and the way in which we speak has diverged and gone in different directions. And, because our writing is reserved for the keeping of our records only, it is not useful for us in daily discourse, a manner of speaking with our hands has been devised. This, as a companion to our spoken tongues, allows us to communicate with our relations without discord. 
3 So efficient, in fact, is this method of communication, and so precise, that many of our traders use it exclusively. And it is a very curious thing to speak to one of them after that they have returned from a year’s trading with our neighbors, for they do not give up their custom quickly. Yea, they do continue to speak with their hands and barely a few words to escape their mouths until they have been home among us for some time. 
4 And these are the borders of the Nem of the Mountains: From the place where the ice allows one to cross over the West Sea even extending down the coast even to the gulf of the sea where Hagoth put in and built a settlement before continuing up the River Akish, this is known as the Coasts of the Nem of the Mountains. And from there going inland to the mouths of the great canyons and continuing northward along the spine of mountains and bending back toward the sea, is also known as the Coasts. This continuing northward and venturing inland somewhat from place to place is also part of that province. 
5 Then where the River Potelim, which flows from out of the mountains down to the sea, and it is a morning’s journey, could one walk upon the waters as the Three do, to cross it at its confluence, continuing eastward through the Spine, there opens up a great basin and plains which extend far into the north and even up against the Great Mountains; this is the province known as Potal and Nespelem. And the western half of this region is known as Potal and the eastern portion is known as Nespelem. 
6 Now, the mountain range known to us as the Spine extends from the extreme north even down almost to the gulf and then continues inland to divide the northern portions of the Land Southward down the middle. The Coasts governs all the land from the West Sea to the tops of the Spine. Potal governs all the land east of the Spine extending from four days’ journey south of the River Potelim and continuing up until the wastes of the north. This land extending inland until the Winding River, which in the sign language is shown as two hands together giving a winding motion as that of the movement of a snake, does meet the Potelim and then following the basin and plain even into the far north country, is also part of that province. 
7 From the great Salten Sea which lies to the north of Meninta traveling northward and westward until one reaches the confluence of the Winding and the Potelim, and then following the shoulders of the mountains northward, this marks the borders of the province we know as Nespelem. Continuing from the Salten Sea eastward over the mountains and out onto the plains and then northward even up into the wastes of the far north, this is also part of that province. 
8 Now, the Coasts, Potal and Nespelem are the three provinces of the Nem of the Mountains, and we speak a language that has sundered somewhat from that which Hagoth spoke. Nevertheless, it is still similar unto that language in many regards. 
9 In the southern portion of the Coasts, the Nem speak a language that is not at all far sundered from that which our forefathers spoke in the Land Southward. In the northern portion of the Coasts and in Potal, the spoken language of the people is somewhat more sundered from our original tongue. 
10 Now, there are the Nem of the Islands, the same country that was formed when Hagothah traveled there and built up his settlements. Their borders are recorded in their own records and few are there among the Nem of the Mountains who travel enough in those parts to know the lay of that country. For it is a nation of islands and only they know the area of it. 
11 But the Nem of the Islands do often come to our shores and up our rivers, for they are great navigators of the sea and know the waves each by their own names. Yea, and they are accomplished in the navigation by use of the stars and the position of the sun, which is a mysterious thing to us, who navigate by the lay of the land. 
12 And even more curious is their ability to judge by the size of the swell and the direction of the wave such things as their location upon the sea, as also the weather in diverse places, even far away lands. And this is a curious science to me and one filled with wonder. 
13 Now, from four days’ journey east of the Great Mountains which divide the west from the plains, extending down into the south even until one reaches the 
borders of the People of the great gulf, and continuing all the way to the great forests, this is the Nation we know as the Nem of the Plains. And there is a great river which is known as the Misisip which divides the plains from the forests. Continuing northward from the Misisip until it turns to the west, this is the Nation we know as the Nem of the Plains. And it was once part of the Nem of Corianton but it has since become a nation of its own people. 
14 And the Nem of the Plains follow the great herds and make their living in that way. Wherefore, they make their homes from the hides of the cattle and they are easily taken down and moved. 
15 Now, from the Misisip eastward to the mountains and northward even up to the great eastern gulf which gives onto the East Sea is the nation we know as the Nem of the Lakes. 
16 These are they who have grown out of the that nation that Corianton forged among the wild people found in the land and their language is sundered from that which is spoken in Nespelem to the extent that to speak with them requires some expertise in the sign language. Notwithstanding the sundering of the languages, they do consistently send delegates to our Great Councils and we do also send our delegates unto theirs. 
17 In the south regions and along the East Sea, there are other nations and they are made up of the remnant of the Lamanites who were left in the land after the Great War. And for a time they were numbered among the Nem, but they have left the path of the Nem and have no more all things in common and they live not by the Common Consent but will have kings and rulers to govern them. These are considered neighbors but they are not Nem. Wherefore, the Nem have concourse with them and do trade with them from time to time, but the Nem do for the most part remain separated from them. 
18 Now, the people of the Land Southward do occupy all the face of the land in that region even down past the narrow neck of land and continuing down the coast of the West Sea even down to the southernmost regions. And they do make war each city upon the other. Yea, seldom have we had word of any nation which does grow to any size but that their neighbors do seek to bring them into subjection unto themselves. This is become the way and the economy of the Land Southward. 
19 Now this is the lay of the land of the Lands Northward and Southward, and of the peoples thereof. Of other lands and peoples we have heard much, and even some of our own people have traveled in diverse places in the world. But their borders and their stories must be written in other records and we are satisfied to hear of them in the stories that their pilgrims tell when they come to visit in the lands of the Nem. 


CHAPTER 10 
1 And it pleased the Nem of Nespelem to call me up to the seat of the high priest because I did lead my people out of Meninta up into the north country. And this was considered a great act of council, but I esteem it no great thing. But the people proclaimed it as a mighty work - that so great a Common Consent could be made by so large a population. And the people esteemed me greatly because of the removal of an entire people up into safety. 
2 And when the people see me in the streets of the cities and settlements of Nespelem, they do greet me and make a peculiar obeisance unto me. And this thing does give me cause for discomfort, for I do not esteem myself differently than any other father. But the people do this peculiar thing out of respect of what the people of Meninta gave in sacrifice for our way of life. 
3 But the people do not bow down in any kind of worship when they do this, for this would be sin. But they do incline the head and place a hand upon their breast whenever they do see me or pass by me in the streets and in the synagogues. 
4 And behold, this thing displeases me, for it does seem to me to set one apart from all others to do such obeisance to one’s fellowman. But the people cannot be convinced to cease the practice, notwithstanding my objections to it. Therefore, so that there might not develop a caste or castes within the Nem, I have taken up the same custom, giving the same obeisance unto all that I meet upon my path. 
5 Now, this thing has become a custom unto us, to greet every person we see with inclined head and a hand upon our breast. And when we pray, it seems to us only natural to make this obeisance unto the Lord unto whom we hope we are sealed. For, we would be His friends and His relations. And if we do this unto all our relations, then it has only become natural to do the same when we pray. 
6 For I must believe that He who has created all things and given us a stewardship here in His creation would want us to feel as much for His love as we do for the love of our relations. And it appears seemly unto me that what deference we give to the least of they who call themselves His relations, so also ought we to give unto Him who is our head. 
7 For Him do we worship, as also His Father and His Mother, by and through the peculiar instrumentality of the Holy Ghost. Yea, we make our oblations and all our prayers unto Them in His name, even the Peacemaker. Even unto Them do we bow ourselves in worship. 
8 And the people do also greet each one the other in a peculiar way, praying in the same moment that all might be well with them. And this is become a sacred thing that we do one unto another. Yea, the Nem of Nespelem have become peculiar in this custom. 
9 Yea, we do this in token that we are one people Zion. Yea, we do incline or bow the head in token that we are of one mind and have all things in common. And we do place a hand upon the breast to signify that we are one people Zion and govern ourselves by the Common Consent. 
10 And this custom does continually remind us that we have covenanted with the Lord that we will live the Law of Consecration. And it is this final law given in this mortality which is called the fullness of the gospel, for it is the culmination of our culture and our society. Behold, it is the keeping of this law that is the finishing of our faith, for by it are we made the friends of the Peacemaker. And it is the breaking of this law that undoes our salvation and causes each to return again unto their own. 
11 Wherefore, should we ever sin against this fullness of the gospel, behold, the Lord shall take from us our stewardship. Behold, this is in accordance with the blessing and the curse which He did lay upon this choice land. Shall we continue in good faith and in prosperity, then let us observe to keep this law and this statute and hallow it. For, in the day we depart from it, seeking our own good over that of our neighbor, we shall have sinned against the fullness of the gospel and the Lord shall turn His holy face from us. Cursed shall be that day. 


CHAPTER 11 
1 Now, after that we had established ourselves and built up our city, even a new Elak Kowa in the mountains, and Nespelem was greatly enlarged by the addition of all the Nem of Meninta who had gathered further north, we began to have peace in the land. And we did also once again have peace in our hearts. For, we had not the conflict of the Tucantorites to cause conflict to arise in our hearts. 
2 But, because the Tucantorites had left the valley of Meninta and the place was left desolate, my brother did once again return there. And he did build up a settlement close by to the libraries, and behold, one of his companions did build a small settlement near unto the Temple Hill. And these were very small settlements and remained so, for there were few who wished to join them in the valley. 
3 And my brother, as also the people who went down unto Meninta with him, did remain in the valley long enough to establish small settlements, which we called missions. And these missions were built with the intention, not of reestablishing the valley to its original character, but to protect and preserve the Temple and the libraries that remained there. 
4 For, although every settlement and every city now have their High Place, yet, the Temple at Mentina was the first to be built in the Land Northward after our father Hagoth made his journey. And the people continue in an especial attitude for the place. And the libraries also continue to hold an especial spirit for the people, and many make a journey now and then to sit in them and read the records. Wherefore, it seemed good that settlements to accommodate travelers ought to be established there. 
5 But my brother was not satisfied to remain long in the lonesome place and he did return after a season of service back up to Nespelem and Elak Kowa. For, he had also married into the family of Akek and his wife and children had remained behind while he sojourned in Meninta. 
6 And he did tell us stories of Meninta, that in the night strange things did take place there and strange sounds were constantly to be heard. For, it was his superstition that the land yet held a memory of the things done in Mentina by the Tucantorites, and that it still mourned the loss of the Nem. Behold, it is his gift to see the spirits of men and women who have lived before and, although he declares that most are benign and only remain in their home because of the happiness they enjoyed there, nevertheless, there are some whose minds are filled with sorrow. These, he said, are not lovely to encounter, for they are filled with sorrow and with pain and they are harrowed up with a longing for things as they used to be. 
7 Yet, there are those whose desire it is to keep the Temple and the libraries there. They do a good work and are not bothered by the ghosts of the past. These do a good work and a good service for the people. For, though we have our records with us, yet, the libraries in Meninta are like none other we have ever found or built. They are fast up in the mountain and they are built deep and sound. Surely, there can be no greater place to keep things so precious and it is my belief that Meninta will figure in our history for a great long time. Wherefore, many do desire to go and spend time in service there. 
8 As for myself, I have remained in Elak Kowa, for it is close unto the city of Nespelem and the people have continued in their call for me to serve them as high priest. 
9 Now, in Elak Kowa and also in Nespelem, the people have asked for a council to govern the church, one such as the Lord did command Shi-Muel to form when He did visit the city of Corianton. Wherefore, I did place before the Mother’s Council the names of all those who had given thoughtful and diligent service in their callings as Peli unto their families and also unto the church. And they did take of the list and pray to discern which of them the Lord would call to the stewardship. 
10 And behold, they did choose out twelve from among the list which I did give unto them and they were nominated. Wherefore, I did take the nominations and I did publish them unto the people, and behold, the people did elect them according as the Mother’s Council did nominate. And these are the names of the Peli Council of Nespelem and of Elak Kowa: 
11 For the city of Elak Kowa, the Common Consent did elect Moronayim, Pa Sanith, Hemaket, Pawna Tan, Heth, Samith, Eapowits, Tselthiem, Tsilet, Morin, Kayalith and Por-Wanith. And they did elect me to be Feather or Head of the Council. 
12 For the city of Nespelem, the Common Consent did elect Hemniet Anith, Panith-Het, Amnikt Ahlekt, Pac-Sineth, Tor-Moniet, Tornit Akek, Hamit, Ayanit Kayanikiit, Hatgowit, Nemietnah, and Heniet-That-Pah. And they did elect Heniet-That-Pah to be Feather or Head of the Council. 
13 These are they which were called by the will of God, and also by the voice of the people to serve in their stewardships in the name of the Peacemaker. And they did counsel with the Community Councils and with the high priests and the priests, as also with the Peli of the families, in order that unity in the church might be firmly established and maintained. And behold, they did make a regulation of the Church and of its celebrations, ceremonies and ordinances. 
14 And they did also regulate that which the communities deemed important to teach all little children with regard to the gospel. And also they did publish and regulate the training of the youths in trades and in stewardships. 
15 Now, the Councils of the Nem of Nespelem were thus: The family held its own Council and elected its own Peli. The villages and settlements called up Mother’s Councils and they chose out Community Councils to help in the government of the community and the administration of the surplus offerings. 
16 The high priest was also called upon to appoint Peli to be priests and high 
priests to serve the people in the synagogues and in the High Places and they also formed a Council. And out of these did the people impose upon one to be high priest of the city. And out of these the General Council of Peli for Nespelem was called up in the manner already described. 
17 And these Councils did assist the people in governing themselves and in establishing peace and equity in the land. And behold, they did adopt the laws as set forth and recorded by Pa Nat, deeming them to be pertinent and sufficient for their purposes. 
18 And it was the charge of these Councils to administer their callings in such a manner as not to become a burden upon the people and upon their freedoms. For, the governing of the people must always remain in service to the people. Yea, the governor is nothing but the servant of the people. And when the governor begins to declare that the people are the servants of the government, then do the people have the right and the responsibility to tear down the government and place a new one in the stead thereof. This is in accordance with the Laws of God, which do always and must supersede the laws of men. 
19 And behold, I prophesy it unto you who shall open this record and read it in the hearing of people in times far distant, that this shall be a sign that the times spoken of by the Lord concerning the restoration of His kingdom and the establishing of Zion once again in this land have surely arrived. Yea, all they who shall discern the need for liberty and a just government shall be swept up in the debate and none shall escape it. And this shall be the argument: Some shall declare that the people are the servant of the sovereign, and behold, still others shall declare that the sovereign is only the servant of the people. And behold, they who believe the former shall raise up Kings and Queens to rule and reign over their elected councils. And they who believe the latter shall elect their councils to govern and the people shall be the Sovereign. 
20 But behold, they neither shall have peace in this land until they shall yield up the scepter that they have delivered up to their riches and their possessions. Yea, it shall not matter what form of election they shall extol so long as they are governed by their greed and their avarice. But they shall rage in their debate over which bad way shall be better and they shall not know peace until Zion is established in the land once again. 
21 Yea, and this shall also cause division among their churches and among their Peli. For there shall be some who shall claim dominion over the people for the sake of their stewardships. And they shall claim authority transmitted in a sacred way to justify them in their interpretation. But they shall not sow peace, but division shall be the fruits of their labors. 
22 And there shall be those who shall raise themselves up before the people because of visions and because of gifts, and they shall take dominion over the people because of them. They shall not sow peace, but division shall be the fruits of their labors. 
23 And there shall be those who, because of their great riches, the people shall elevate until they too shall declare themselves rulers over them in their churches and in their synagogues, but they shall not sow peace, and division shall be the fruits of their labors. 
24 And behold, there shall be those even who read of these records and shall hold them up an ensign unto the world and who shall declare themselves that they might have dominion over the people because of these records. They shall not sow peace but division shall be the fruits of their labors. 
25 Only they who shall receive of the commission of the Peacemaker and who labor as the servant of all shall sow peace and the fruits of their labor shall bring again Zion in the land. 
26 And I know that there shall be many who are offended at my words. For they shall esteem themselves worthy because of their religion and all their good works. Yea, they shall call me a false prophet because they shall esteem themselves to be the very elect of God. 
27 But all their religion shall be as sounding brass. For in the day of which I speak, they who should have received the fullness of the gospel shall have sinned against it. And behold, they shall not even know that they have done it because of the teachings and traditions of their fathers. Yet, they shall have rejected the word of the Peacemaker almost upon the very eve of having received it and they shall lay for generations under His condemnation. All this shall they do in a pall of ignorance because they have rejected His admonition to come unto Him and have taken up the idols of their traditions. 
28 Yea, they shall think so highly of themselves and all their works that they shall think to be saved by them and not in them. Yea, they shall declare that ordinances and observances are mighty to save, but that the presence of the Peacemaker is not essential to that salvation. Wherefore, their governors shall dole out their ordinances and shall dictate their observances and all the people shall bow themselves to their taskmasters and shall enslave themselves unto them. Sore shall be their bondage and their ignorance shall be their only salvation from it when the Peacemaker shall come to liberate them. 
29 And behold, they shall regulate their works such that only a blessed few may have the right and the authority to perform them. Yea, and all the people shall be made to flock to them and call them shepherds, for they shall have rejected all other revelation. And their shepherds shall declare their authority and none shall gainsay them. Yea, in that day, even they who would call themselves the elect of God shall declare by their works and by their traditions that it is by ordinances, and through them that have authority to perform them in the face of all the people, that salvation shall be brought and nothing else shall accomplish it. 
30 Behold, this shall be the state of things when the Lord shall bring again into the light such records as shall be preserved by Him in His wisdom. And behold, there shall be some who take of these things and shall use them for an ensample. These are they who shall bring Zion once again. These are they who shall receive the commission of the Lord and shall guide the people once again to come unto Him. 


CHAPTER 12 
1 In the fifth year after the Nem of Meninta left their valley and took up their habitation in the region which we call Nespelem, we received word from the Nem of the Plains that the waters of the great gulf were receding and that much land had been raised up into the air because of the loss of the water in the gulf. And the gulf was reduced in size by much water, insomuch that islands did appear also. 
2 And it must also be noted that, because the West Sea did also lose ground before the land, that new gulfs and bays were formed that did not exist in the times of our fathers. Yea, barely might the land be recognized the same as when Hagoth took his journey into the West Sea. And of this we were also told by the inhabitants of the Coasts and of the Islands of the Sea. Wherefore, the people did marvel much that the land could change so in but one generation. 
3 And the rains and snows are greatly diminished, to the degree that much that was grown in many places may not now be grown as crops because of the lack of moisture. 
4 But the Nem do adapt themselves well to changing circumstances and we have suffered no hardships because of these changes. Behold, that the winter is less severe is no hardship to us at all and a warmer, dryer summer suits the grasses that grow and give provender for our horses. Nay, I must say, we are not bothered by the changing ways of the seasons because we do adapt to our surroundings. 
5 Now, I have heard of the doings of the people who have inhabited the region where father Hagoth first built his settlement. And we call that place and the region round about it, the Land of Hagoth, but others know it by other names. 
6 In those places the water gathered in by the mountains is most precious and any lack of it causes great hardship. And we understand that the people there have gathered into large settlements and cities. Wherefore, we do worry about them, for if they overburden the land, even land that is taxed by a lack of moisture, then shall they not suffer that which has been the bane of the inhabitants of that region in times past? 
7 And many are the people who have moved into the region that has been brought into the air because of the retreat of the great gulf in the south. These people are come up from the Land Southward and they bring their customs and traditions with them. We keep clear of that place, for we do not wish to excite the Gadianton Robbers whom we know are among them. 
8 But they do not seem interested in our country, for we no longer live as they do, lusting after gain. Yea, we plant for our upkeep but not for gain. And we do not dig in the earth to find the precious things thereof in order that we might adorn ourselves beautifully. Behold, this seems to be the very purpose of existence in the lands to the south. But since this is not our way, the people of the south do not seem to think of us, and this is much to our liking. 
9 And behold, the lake country is reduced to hundreds of smaller lakes and but a few very large bodies of water, instead of the great lakes of the past. And the Nem of Corianton find it more and more difficult to keep to themselves as they were wont to do in times past. For theirs is no longer a fortress of waters and any traveler may find their way into their region now. This has caused some changes for them and many of them have moved further into the north country, even nigh unto the place of cold and snows that last most of the year. And even some have come into our country and have joined themselves with the Nespelem and with the Nem of the Coasts. Nevertheless, there are many who remain in the land where Corianton found them in the beginning of his sojourn in the Land Northward. 
10 And behold, we see less of the visitors from across the East Sea and also from across the West Sea as in times past. Some few still travel into our region but not so many as before and the tales they tell are all of darkness and woe. Surely a great darkness has begun to spread itself across the countries of the earth and a great spiritual dearth has overtaken the nations. 
11 For, it does appear to us, and this observation we make because of the stories we have been told by the few travelers who come into our lands, that the ways of the Lord are foreign to most men in the earth. And this does make our hearts break for the people who must live under such darkness. 
12 But few are they who come into the Land Northward from lands across the sea anymore. Yea, I can only remember meeting but two in the past ten years and I have heard of only three others that were not of the Nem of the Islands. And behold, even they tell of how dangerous it is for them to navigate the sea in an easterly direction because of the viciousness of the pirates who sail there. Wherefore, they do not go in that direction anymore and have lost contact with their own people who went into the countries that lie to the East to settle. 
13 And it is five hundred and fifty two years since the Lord did visit the Nem and establish peace in all the land. And behold, we do still follow Him and His precepts. For we do esteem ourselves to be the children of the Peacemaker and He is our Lord and our Master. 


CHAPTER 13 
1 And in the five hundred and sixty-seventh year, behold, a great body of people did arrive among the Nem of the Coasts and beg leave of the, that they might take up their residence there. For they had been driven upon the seas for the more part of a year and they were torn and weary. Wherefore, they were accepted and taken in, and succored by our relations on the coast and they became part of the Nem. 
2 And behold, they told of wars and of pestilences and of famines and of plagues in the country from which they did travel. Yea, and so great were their losses because of the hardship of their flight that only the tenth part of them escaped to the West alive. And they wanted for everything. Yea, their state was pitiable. 
3 But they did accept the manner in which we live. Yea, they had taken up the Common Consent before they had left their homeland and they had been persecuted because of it. They had all things in common and had attempted to live by this law in the place of their fathers, but the people were wicked and persecuted them. Behold, they were driven from country to country and none gave them place. Wherefore, when they come into the shores of the Nem, even though they were a great people still, they told of how they had dwindled to the tithe of their former numbers. 
4 And they were a sea-loving people. Wherefore, the Nem did suggest places along the ocean where they might build settlements and begin again to live as the Spirit had instructed them. And they did establish service missions among them and sent them teachers whom they gratefully accepted. 
5 Now, this people were of small and compact stature and their features were like unto the people who dwell in the north countries that are found across the West Sea. And they speak a language that is not far sundered from that which is spoken by the Nem of the Coasts, for that language has been added upon by the travelers and settlers that have come from that country. 
6 And the leader of this people was Hin. And he was a man of wisdom who told of how his fathers lived in a great land that could be found by crossing over the West Sea and when landfall is reached, by traveling again into the north. And he told of people who came in unto their country to live and that they taught his fathers their ways and their customs, and they became one people. These people called themselves Nemen and they came from the Islands of the West Sea. 
7 But the rulers of his nation grew wicked and the people with them. And they persecuted the Nemen and all they who joined with them in their peculiar way of living. And when Hin decided to lead the remnant of that people away back into the east, there were many who chose to journey with him. These were the remnants of a kindred people who had left the Nem of the Islands to settle in other lands, but now they were come again home at last. Yea, they had found a home again among their own kindred. 
8 And behold, it was at the same time as the appearance of the Nem of Hin, and their union with the Nem of the Coasts, that Timothy did visit the people of Nespelem. He it was who told us of the arrival of Hin and his people and we sent emissaries to greet them and to welcome them. 
9 Timothy is the brother of Nephi and of Lehi, who is called Mathonihah by this people. And he has visited from time to time. These brothers are wonderful in their wisdom and in their gifts, for they walked and talked with the Peacemaker when He came to visit the people of this land. Yea, I say unto you, that they did walk and talk as we do in the day that the Peacemaker appeared from out of commotion and ministered to our people. 
10 Now, Timothy has for his stewardship the teaching of the people who live here in the Land Northward and also they who live in the Land Southward. He is our minister and he assists us in keeping the sure way of the Lord. 
11 And Nephi has for his stewardship the teaching and observing of the people who live in the lands of our fathers, even round about Jerusalem of old, and he does travel in the lands to the west and to the south of that place. 
12 And Mathonihah has for his stewardship the teaching and observing of the people who live in the lands of our fathers, even round about Jerusalem of old, and he does travel in the lands to the east and to the north of that place. 
13 And they live and do not taste of death. Neither do they taste of sickness or of pain as we do. Or, in other words, they do not suffer such things in the way in which we do. For they do suffer pain and hunger, but they do not die of it. But, notwithstanding they are preserved from such things, that they might accomplish the thing that they desired of the Lord, they are harrowed up by the things they see. For they must witness all the wickedness of men in all the lands of the earth, and this must harrow up their souls. 
14 And behold, they are directed in all things by that Apostle who was the beloved of the Lord when He too walked the earth as a man. Yea, John is the Chief Disciple of their Council. 
15 The work of these translated men is a work of instruction unto all people who might listen unto the voice of their counsel. And also, when the Lord’s church and His ways are found among the people, these three assist them in regulating themselves, that they might retain the direction of the Peacemaker. But, if the shepherds and the servants of the Lord do become puffed up in the pride of their hearts, behold, tales of these shall become but a myth and a fable unto the people of that time. 
16 Now, at the same time as the Nemen of Hin came into the land to take up their place among their relations, Timothy did also appear as a man walking from the east. And he did tell somewhat of the arrival and of the history of the Nemen of Hin. And that history is written and is hid up with the records of the Nem of the Coasts. And behold, that record shall come forth in the due time of the Lord for the benefit of all people. 
17 And Timothy did remain some time with the Nem of Nespelem, and also he did go over unto the Nem of Potal to teach them also. And the words and the teachings of the Three are of great import unto us, for we believe that they are sent of God and that they are the servants of the Peacemaker. Wherefore, we cherish their words and we do follow their teachings. And these are some of the words of Timothy when he visited the Nem of Nespelem: 
18 Behold, the Lord is with you, Nem. You walk in a sacred manner, as also your talk is in a sacred manner. You did come out from iniquity because you will insist upon following the counsels of the Lord. Yea, you abandon home and hearth, merely because you esteem the Lord more than you do the stuff of the earth. And behold, you esteem Him more than you do your customs and your traditions. Even do you esteem the Lord greater than the land of your fathers. And this is folly in the sight of men, but I say unto you, Nem, it is of great worth unto the Lord. Yea, He is pleased with you. 
19 But this is not all. You do also continue in that thing wherein He did teach your forefathers. Yea, you do continue to teach the New and Everlasting Covenant that He revealed unto them in times past. Behold, this is a thing seldom seen in the world in these times. For there is no nation under heaven except the Nem that continues in the gospel of the Peacemaker. 
20 Yea, believe me when I say that you are a blessed people. For, the Lord blesses them that believe on Him and hold fast to that which He has taught them. And blessed are you, Nem. 
21 And what is it that you teach that has preserved your peace, even when all the world around you is harrowed up in war and bloodshed? Behold, what is your safeguard against that turmoil in the which the whole world is embroiled. Is it that your wise men have more wisdom? I say unto you, Nay. For, you are only as wise as any. 
22 It is that you do keep the Way of the Lord. Yea, it is that you do walk upon the Way which He has provided for all they who believe in His name and who wish to obtain greater truth and knowledge. But it is not that you are born more intelligent, never believe it. 
23 For the children of men are born in this natural state in like manner as all the living things upon the earth are born. And if they continue in this state, so shall they remain, lives and deaths everlasting, for they are satisfied to be ruled by the natural man. 
24 But if they will be elevated and set aside this natural man, the Lord shall welcome them upon the Way to receive greater wisdom and knowledge. And behold, they are changed even in their physical, and this is a thing that must be so. For, the natural man may only take up that knowledge that is useful to the survival of the race. Wherefore, what knowledge he may acquire is of a kind and a nature that will serve himself. But, when the children of men do stretch themselves past that knowledge which conveys from the strength of the arm of the flesh, they are elevated above the world, worlds without end. 
25 And behold, in the crisis of your faith, you did set aside all the needs of the natural man and you did teach the laws and statutes of the kingdom of God. Yea, you did even send out missionaries to teach the laws of God, so greatly did the Spirit pull upon your intellects. And I declare unto you, These are the things that do elevate a man or a nation. 
26 And the things that are important to all the world, you set aside as if they were a thing of naught. Yea, did you not set aside homes? And I know that some of you had lived in such places many generations and all your good memories are there. Yet, in the conflict and the crisis, you did pack up your few things and you did take to the wilderness. And why would you do this? It is because the house is built to accommodate the family, and yet, it is not the family. 
27 And behold, you were not caught up in the pride of your hearts because someone decided that your way was not adequate for their needs. You found it not necessary that all men speak and act as you do. Nay, but pride did not make you dictators. Nevertheless, you did defend the faith. But pride would have proven your destruction just as it did your adversaries. Behold how you did vanquish the enemies of God, but you did not do it in the pride of your hearts. 
28 And your little ones are taught that they must seek the face of the Lord to obtain the gospel. And they are taught obedience at the feet of the Peacemaker. I ask you, shall they ever be despoiled of this great blessing? Shall any ruler or despot wrest from them this boon? Shall any false prophet gainsay them, or bring them into the bondage of the soul? And if they are ever taken into bondage, where is the sting? For behold, can any petty ruler be esteemed greater than the Lord of Heaven? 
29 And shall any man raise himself up to be the arm of the Lord without that all the people shall be able to prove his claim? Shall any deceiver raise himself up to lead the people astray when they have communion with Angels and with the Peacemaker Himself? Behold, this shall never be, so long as your little ones are taught from their youths to seek that revelation which comes of the Lord, and directly. 
30 And behold, all your sacrifices are selfless, and in this is the Lord greatly pleased. Yea, there is no self service in your oblations, and this is because you have taught the first law. For, how can anyone be misled in the sacrifice and in the offerings when their schoolmaster is the Peacemaker? Surely, a man may teach you false doctrine and thereby lead you into strange sacrifice. But the Lord shall never do it. Strait is His way and narrow the gate. But you have sought His face early and cannot be deceived in anything. 
31 And behold again, in all your families there is fidelity. Yea, men do honor their covenants and women do faithfully serve their families. And there is no wantonness, nor the strife that comes of it. And men do not break the hearts of their wife or their children with adultery. And behold, women are not found in wickedness. Is there any nation on earth where such things do not corrupt the hearts of the children of men? I say unto you, Yea! It is found among the Nem. 
32 Behold, where men and women make durable covenants in the Lord, shall He not uphold those covenants? When the man and the woman are sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise, with whom the Peacemaker has made His covenant, even that covenant He made with the Father and the Holy Ghost before the world was, shall He not take up such covenants as His own, when the man and the woman are made His? Wherefore are you become eternal and your marriage is eternal, even from everlasting to everlasting, for heaven and earth shall pass away, yet all that is His shall be durable forever. 
33 It is because that you do hold fast unto these teachings that you are the more able to put away the natural man. And herein lies your greatest blessing, for it is the fullness of your faith, even the fullness of the gospel. Yea, because of these precepts it is made the easier for you to cast off the natural man and create Zion in your hearts. And when Zion is created in the hearts of the people, shall it be prevented in the foundation? Shall not Zion become the charter of the nation? 
34 For, shall you do differently in the administration of your civil duty than you do in your home? Shall you teach your children one thing and the citizens another? I say unto you, Shall a man attempt such duplicity, his efforts shall not survive the generation. 
35 But when the laws of the Peacemaker are not taught in the home, see you how the nation is corrupted. When children are taught that the father is sovereign and that his will is the gospel in the home, shall they seek the face of the Peacemaker? If the law of the home is the law of the father or of the mother, and they make of themselves tyrants unto their children, shall the children learn to follow the King of Heaven while yet in the home? 
36 And when the sacrifice is determined for them by the father or the mother, how will they ever look to the Lord to determine their sacrifice. And if they make their oblations upon the commands of the father or the mother, shall their sacrifice ever cease to be dictated by some other person, some ruler? If their offering in their youth is made to satisfy the demands of men or women, shall they ever make a suitable sacrifice when they are grown? Shall they break their hearts and throw off the natural man? Shall they sit at the feet of the Peacemaker and be instructed? 
37 And if they are taught in their youths to respect the dictates of their father or their mother and to seek not to honor them by the confirmation of the Holy Ghost in all things, shall they ever seek such confirmation in anything else? Can they be expected to change their custom simply because they become fathers and mothers? Shall they not also dictate all things unto their children? Is equity taught in this manner? 
38 And shall men join themselves in fidelity when they have been taught to dictate in the home? Shall the father and the mother ever work diligently to serve their children in faith when they have been raised to respect the will of the tyrant? Shall their unions ever be blessed and sealed up unto the Lord by the Holy Spirit of Promise? I say unto you, Nay. For how can you expect the Lord to take up wickedness? 
39 Can any who has studied unrighteous dominion in the home ever hope to set the world and its ways aside? Can the Law of Consecration ever be understood by such a one? It is impossible and cannot be expected. It is for this cause that the Lord did teach your forefathers the laws and ordinances of the High Place in the very manner in which He did. Yea, His ways are wise and He has all things before Him. Wherefore, do not distrust the instruction He gave unto your fathers. 
40 Behold, Nem, you are an ensign unto the world and an ensample. Shall the world ever say that the Lord’s purposes are too difficult for the children of men to accomplish? Shall the world ever justify itself in perverting the laws of God? Shall men ever justify a lesser law because the people cannot live the greater? 
41 Behold all these things shall be in the mouths of men in latter days, but the Nem shall have laid a foundation for all men. Such false prophets and wicked rulers shall lay the account upon the people, but the fault thereof shall be their own. Yea, the Lord shall cease to reveal anything unto their prophets and generations shall pass in which He shall hold His peace and give no instruction through them. But behold, a time shall come when the people shall cast such rulers aside and turn again to their Lord and seek His face. Behold, Nem, the ensample that you make for them shall assist them and shall edify them. 
42 But even these shall not make serious conquest of the world. Yea, I say unto you, Even they unto whom the Lord shall have given the commencement of the restoration of all things shall not walk in sound principles and they shall lead the nation in false doctrine. But mothers and fathers shall teach their children in spite of all their shepherds shall demand. And here a few, and there a few, shall the Lord build up again a Zion in the land, but not out of the ashes of a fallen church. 
43 Behold, He shall take away the stewardship and the keys of His kingdom from among the Gentiles. And when they are taken back, even according as He has promised unto your ancestors, they shall not be given back unto them that did pervert His ways. But He shall not withhold such things from the children of men, nay, not even for a season. For, in the very same generation in which He shall take up the stewardship over His kingdom on earth from out of the Gentiles, He shall also restore the Sons and Daughters of Lehi and of Levi. It is unto these that your teachings shall be an ensign. Yea, it is unto these that your musings shall be instructive. 
44 For they shall have been prepared by all that the Lord did accomplish through the Gentiles. And even there shall be some few from among the Gentiles who shall continue to be His servants, and shall set aside the riches and the enticements of the world to serve Him. They shall not want of reward. Nay, behold, they shall be numbered in among the children of Lehi by adoption. And all wherein the Lord has blessed them shall also be a blessing unto they who become the Sons and Daughters of Lehi and of Levi. But they shall not pollute the way of the Lord with the filthiness of men. 
45 But the rulers of the people shall wallow in their own judgment. Yea, they shall be drunken as with bad wine, which is bought from the disreputable. Yea, the wine of their sacrament shall have been thinned down with water of the trough and it shall be unfit to drink. Thinned and polluted shall be the cup that they take to their lips in the name of the Lord and their sacrifice shall be unprofitable. 
46 And the goodness of the grain shall they winnow out and there shall be no substance left in the bread. They shall be fat with bread that shall have been bought with the strength of the innocent. Yea, the bread of their sacrament shall have no part in the covenant of the Lord but shall be a token of their bondage only and shall be unfit to eat. Yet shall they hold it up unto the Lord and say: 
47 This is thy body, Lord. We eat it in remembrance of our covenants with Thee. 
48 Behold, they have sold the profitable out of the grain before ever they held it up as a sacrifice unto the Lord. 
49 And shall He respect their sacrifice? Shall He think of it in any better light than He did the sacrifice of Cain? Is He become no discerner of the hearts of men? Or does He know less the motives and intentions of men now than He did when Cain and Abel made their first sacrifices? Nay, but there is one sacrifice in the last days that He will accept and justify and that is the fullness of a heart broken in pure sacrifice and the fullness of a spirit made contrite in the blood of the Lamb of God. 
50 By the sweat of his brow does man break the earth, and dung it, and plant the grain and care for it. Then by that same sweat does he reap down the corn and winnow it. And whole and wholesome as his own intention does he labor to make the bread and bake it. This is the broken heart, and anything else than this is not justified. Let the sacrifice of bread be whole and not in parts. 
51 Yea, by the sweat of his brow shall man set in the earth the vine and nurture it. And he is certain to ready the bees ere the blossom is set and prepare them. And when the fruit is laid on, does he not carefully judge the time to harvest? Yea, and he does gather in with his strength the fruit of the vine to the winepress and stamp it out with his feet. And the sacrifice is pure wine, of his own make, and is not purchased from afar off. 
52 Take not up the polluted to offer it a sacrifice unto the Lord. Take not up that which is taught of men and make it up as doctrine and the will of God. This is the sacrifice of bad intention. Such was the sacrifice of Cain and the Lord accepted it not. Neither shall He accept bad water and empty bread for your sacraments. Let your oblations be of full heart and your sacraments be of good intention and the Lord shall accept it, as He did Abel’s. And the Gentiles who are gathered into the House of Israel shall be made new by the good sacrifice, casting away that which is empty and taking up that which is full of grace. 
53 This is the thing which shall be taken up by the Remnant of the House of Israel that shall be left in this land in the last days. Behold, they shall not take up that which the Gentiles have already polluted and wrest it again. Nay, the hide beaten poorly by the Gentiles shall not be softened and shall not be made respectable. Nor shall the darkened and scorched linen of the Gentiles be made white at the hands of the Remnant. But they shall take up that which was softened and whitened in times past and with it they shall bring again Zion. 
54 The field planted by the Gentiles shall be filled with vice. Wherefore, shall the Remnant take residence in such a field? Shall they, as squatters, take of that which the Gentiles have made waste and with it fatten the calf? Nay. But they shall harrow up the ground anew and plant anew. For, the fertile earth shall have lain fallow at the hands of absent stewards who knew it not. And the Remnant shall plow it up once again and plant it. And it shall once again bare the grain that shall fatten the Remnant. 
55 For the vineyard shall have lain desolate in the sloth of the unprofitable servant. And when the Lord of the vineyard shall take up the stewardship from him and give it into the hands of another, then shall the old vines be cast down and the new stock set and the rows renewed. And shall he take of the diseased root to plant again? I say unto you, Nay. But he shall find a good and profitable strain out of a vineyard which is distant, and this shall he use to restore the vine of the Lord’s House. 
56 Then shall the Lord of the Vineyard come in from His journey and see the good steward and His profitable servant. 
57 Do you see, then, how good and profitable your writings shall be unto them that the Lord shall raise up in this land in the latter day? Can you discern how they shall take up your precept and your principle and carry it into the vineyards of their intentions? Yea, they shall take the seed laid up in store by you and plant it in the fallow earth and it shall prosper. They shall take up the root preserved by you and plant it in their hearts and Zion shall grow up again in the land. 
58 Wherefore, I do not praise you out of reason. I observe your doing and foreknow the good that the Lord shall do with it. Do but continue in it, Nem, for in this is your happiness now, but also out of your doings shall the Remnant of the House of Israel set in order the House of God and renew the stewardship. And in that day the just shall receive their stewardship not by the dictate of any man, but by the voice of the Lord and their surplus shall they render up to the poor of their own and without commandment. 
59 Yea, they shall read of your works in days far sundered from you. And some shall scorn them because they did not flow unto them from out of the mouths of their shepherds, whom they have justified. Behold, for no greater sin than to have come from out of the dust and to be delivered by one other than their own prophets, many shall turn the heal from your words. 
60 And again behold, many shall spurn your works because they contradict that which they hold by their own knowledge to be true. The writings and record of your days shall come to them in a time when their wise men shall declare that such things could never have happened. 
61 And yet, in the midst of this turmoil over man’s knowledge and the strength of the arm of the flesh, some few will read them with pure intent. These are they who will subject your records unto the Holy Ghost to discern what portion of them shall be useful unto them in their times. Behold, and it shall happen that, because of the curious work of the Lord in the last days, these few shall have flowing through them the blood of Lehi and they shall be a Remnant of the House of Israel, though they shall also be of Gentile lineage. 
62 This is the fullness of the Gentiles and the fullness of the Jews. These shall not be daunted by the ridicule of their neighbors. Nay, nor shall they be swayed by the doctrines and sciences of men. Nor even shall they be turned away by the heel of their shepherds, who shall persecute them. But they, being firm in the faith of their fathers, shall read your words and shall subject them to the confirmation of the Holy Spirit of Promise. 
63 Then shall this record become an ensign unto them. They shall take wisdom from it, and also they shall be encouraged. For, with what they learn in the pages that shall be translated by the gift and power of the Holy Ghost, they shall come out of Babylon and take not up her unclean thing anymore. They shall withstand the buffetings of the world and the jeering of the rabble mob and they shall lift up an emblem of peace and of charity to all the world. 
64 And the wisdom of the wise shall conspire against them. For, the wise men shall have already determined by the application of all their knowledge and science, that your people could not have lived at all, let alone record your doings on plates of metal. But this shall not sway the Remnant left in the land in the last days. They shall already know that man’s knowledge is weak and his wisdom and science is not steady. 
65 And harshness and persecution shall not return the faith of the people to the shepherds who use it to extort such faithfulness. Nay, evil speaking of the Lord’s Anointed shall turn many from exploring your doings, but not all. There shall be some who retain a knowledge and a witness more sure than that which is conveyed to them from the mouths of such shepherds. These are they who shall remember to prove all things by the power of the Holy Ghost. Yea, these are they who shall not be separated from God, but shall exercise their right to the wisdom and the mysteries of godliness. 
66 And they shall be Heirs with Christ in the Kingdom of God, for they shall not deny the Holy Ghost, but shall seek His confirmation of all things. These are they unto whom the Lord shall extend His almighty hand once again and they shall walk in His dignity. Yea, they shall see Him face to face, as their ancestors did. Through them shall the Lord once again order His house and theirs shall be the victory and the reward of heaven. 
67 Yea, you may rejoice in your posterity in the last days, for they shall again establish Zion in this land. They shall do it in their hearts and they shall teach their children the ways of the Lord in their homes. Then shall their children combine together to do the Lord’s work and none shall separate them again. Yea, there shall be no division in the House of the Lord when they shall cast off the yoke of bondage and raise up a Zion again. 


CHAPTER 14 
1 Now, I would not that you should be downcast because that I have prophesied concerning your descendents in the latter days, how that they shall again establish Zion in the land. Yea, I do discern your hearts that you are cast down because of my words. But do not let your hearts be troubled over my words. 
2 Behold, it is certain that the Nem shall not always live in the happy state in which one may look upon you now. Yea, there shall be changes in this land and, although I will tell you that the Nem shall dwindle and all but disappear from off the face of the land, yet shall there be some few here and there that will retain the memory of the doings of their ancestors and they shall revere them. This reverence shall also help to bring about a remembrance of them and of their doing. Yea, it shall be this tiny remembrance that shall induce some few of your descendents to look back again and seek to translate your records. 
3 But behold, were it not for that which shall remain of your ways and your customs, even these would find no inducement to look back upon the vistas of time to do the great work to which they shall be called. Yea, each of them shall hear of their ancestors and be in wonder of the things they did, and they shall desire more understanding. And the Lord shall lead them into that place where they shall find the records you do so diligently keep and they shall set their hands to the translation of them. Behold, the things that you write, see how they shall excite the minds and the hearts of them that seek the face of Christ! 
4 But behold, I would not that you should be downhearted even at this time because that the Nem shall not always enjoy that freedom and happiness which you do at this time. For there shall be many years yet in which the Nem shall prosper in the land and your decline shall be slow. 
5 But there shall come decline even among the Nem when the people cease to be one in that unity with which the Lord does now bless you. And that unity shall not be broken until the people forget the Lord and His ways and cease to trouble the Spirit in all things. When they shall have become hardened in their pride and lifted up, then shall the Lord turn His face from even them, and they shall dwindle. 
6 And in the day that the Lord shall bring the Gentiles into this land, there shall be but a few villages of Nem left in the land. In those days, the Gentiles shall esteem all the inhabitants of the land the same and they shall not take time to understand them. Even the pure in heart shall be cast to and fro and trampled by the will and the industry of the Gentiles. 
7 And behold, let not three generations pass by after the coming of the Gentiles into the land and there will remain but a very small remnant of the Sons and Daughters of Lehi to be counted. Then shall they be tossed aside as dross and cast down, and trod upon. Yea, their faces shall be ground in the earth and they shall become the least of peoples. And this shall be the state of the people unto the fourth and fifth generation. But behold, out of them shall rise up a nation. Yea, out of them shall the Lord reorder His church and kingdom. 
8 For, though they shall be tossed aside, yet shall the Gentiles take them up even unto themselves secretly and their blood shall be mingled. Then shall the blood of Israel burn in the Gentile heart. Then shall the fullness of the Gentiles come. Yea, the spirit of Nem shall cry out within them and their hearts shall swell with a remembrance of things they never saw. Words and wisdom shall rise up within them, words they never heard. And they shall step forward to heal the earth, speaking words of comfort and of peace in a land torn with discord. 
9 And when all the world is bent on using up the good of the Earth, the spirit of Nem shall rise up in the hearts of the Remnant and they shall turn from the world. Yea, they shall bend the knee reverently and take up the earth in their hands and kiss it. And they shall call the earth after our Mother in Heaven, and they shall care for it. 
10 Behold, your descendents shall come away from the cities and the high towers that the Gentiles shall build up as a monument to their own might and they shall bend their backs again with the Earth and make of it a hallowed garden again. They shall speak of her as a person and they shall revere her as if she were their own grandmother. And this they shall do figuratively, but this image shall shape the characters of their children and prepare them to do a great work among the children of men. 
11 Yea, they shall also turn once again to the Peacemaker to learn the Gospel, and they shall be obedient to His teaching. And their sacrifices shall be unto them a schoolmaster and they shall learn to walk in the ways of the Lord once again, for He shall not turn His face from they who do diligently seek Him. 
12 And their covenants that they make one with another shall once again be durable, for the Lord and Sovereign of Heaven shall bind them and the Holy Ghost shall seal them up. Yea, they shall be once again the House and Kingdom of the Lord. They shall not be puffed up in the pride of their hearts and shall not turn in all directions to declare their own worthiness. But the Lord shall call them worthy and He shall bless them and prosper them. 
13 And they shall receive again the stewardship of the Lord. Yea, He shall install them once again over the vineyard and they shall be good stewards unto Him, not being commanded in all things, nor subject unto the bondage of any man. But willing and fruitful servants unto the Lord they shall be and obedient to His will. 
14 Then shall they have all things once again in common, for there shall be no poor among them. Yea, each shall be the good steward of the Lord and they shall all labor with their might for their own maintenance. But they shall also labor day and night to provide for the needy. And the beggar shall have no place to set up his stall, for he shall be 
brought in and never allowed to put up his petition. Yea, and thus shall be their villages and their settlements. Behold, they shall all labor for the good of each and every other, that there shall be no poor in the House of the Lord. 
15 And there shall be wars and rumors of wars and the nation around them shall burn with the wrath of the people one against each other. But behold, they among your descendents who shall have been called up, the Remnant of Israel, shall not suffer because of the strife that shall prevail in the land. But being perceived as unprofitable by their neighbors, the strife shall pass by them like the whirlwind. 
16 Yea, theirs shall be the only peace in the land in many places and wherever they are established, their neighbors shall wonder at them. Nevertheless, they shall possess nothing that the rabble mob shall desire. They shall be peculiar, but this shall not be enough to entice the Gadianton Robbers to molest them. And behold, because they shall not be caught up in the getting and retaining of riches, they shall have no part or party in the things that drive their neighbors to violence one against another. 
17 For it is a peculiar thing when Zion is established that the curse upon the land is taken away. And you are aware of the curse that has been placed upon this land according to the word of the Lord. Behold, part of this curse shall sorely vex the Gentiles. For they do work diligently with their hands to acquire great wealth. Yea, they do wear out their lives and this motive shall become their entire purpose and they shall set their eye singly unto it. 
18 But, according to the blessing and curse that has been laid upon this land, when they seek to obtain riches, but not with their purpose set on the glory of God, all that they lay aside shall become slippery and they shall not be able to hold onto it. Yea, and it shall be thus in this land, that when a man lays up his riches, thinking that they will be safe until he returns to them, he shall not find them. 
19 And behold, a thing that shall be esteemed of great worth in one season shall suddenly lose its worth and be good only to be cast aside. Wherefore, men shall work all their lives to amass wealth, but in the end, they shall find that all that they have amassed shall have no value. 
20 And when their riches lose their worth, they shall become angry with their fellow man and esteem all to be robbers of his wealth. This shall be a thing that does drive many people to madness and there shall be much sorrow and much destruction because of it. Yea, the desire for riches and for costly things shall overcome the desire of the love of God and the people shall move greedily upon the face of the earth consuming all before them. And when that which they esteemed of the greatest worth loses its value, they shall be as maddened by their lack as by their abundance. 
21 But they who establish Zion in the latter days shall not hold the things of the world in greater esteem than they do their Lord. They shall want for nothing, for their desires shall not be to amass riches but to provide for their needs. And the surplus of their goods they shall freely give unto the needy. 
22 And where their neighbors shall consume all things before them, your descendents shall produce all the things they need. Behold, I discern your wonder at my words and I see your confusion. How can a people consume the earth and produce not for their own needs? This seems impossible to you. But behold, I say unto you and I forewarn you, There shall come a day in this land when the people shall not labor with their hands and provide for their own needs. But every one will labor for riches and with these riches they shall buy up the things they need from a very few who produce them. And all of their substance shall go toward the purchase of the fruit and labor of others, and very often, their fruit shall come from afar to be consumed by the people. Because of this, all the riches that they might amass must be spent in buying the things that they need to sustain themselves from day to day. 
23 And does this fill you with wonder? Behold, I tell you that even they who live in this manner shall call themselves blessed and they shall scorn and ridicule those who live not as they do. Yea, they shall esteem as savage the life of he who produces all the things that they must purchase with all their wealth. Nay, do not stare! For such shall be the way of things when your descendents shall turn away from the way of the world and work to bring again the Zion of the Lord. 
24 Wherefore, be glad in your hearts, Nem, that you do not live in such times. Be glad that you live in a time when Zion does flourish in the land. And give thanks that the earth does put forth abundantly of her bounty. For it shall not always be so. Yea, there comes a time when even the earth shall not give freely because of the wickedness of men. And Zion shall be a rare thing in the earth. Behold, they are perilous times in which the Remnant shall begin again the work of the Lord. 
25 And continue in the commandments. For in keeping the way of the Lord, you do demonstrate that you do walk and talk with Him on the Way. And what greater demonstration of your faith might there be than this? You are greatly blessed, even above all the peoples of the world. Behold, you are among the few peoples who wait upon the Lord and learn His ways, and because of this, you are prospered more than any other people. Yea, who can tell when last any man of the Nem had need of taking up the sword against an enemy? Yet, in all the world there is no peace to be found except where men and women know their Lord and walk uprightly before Him. Behold, this is the great demonstration of faith.
26 And you know wherewith the Lord has blessed you and wherein you have been prospered beyond measure. But I would have you know the manner in which you do bless and benefit all things because of the manner in which you live.
27 Behold, I would call your minds to that which I did teach the Nem in times past, how that when you exercise faith you do cause a movement upon the matter of creation. When any matter is moved upon, behold, it is within the measure of its creation that it should move upon yet other matter. This movement continues outward from its point of origin, or in other words, from the original action. Now, this continues until it does return again to its origination. For all things may be described as one eternal round. And if all things may be so described, then the Universe is spherical.
28 And the same principle applies to all kinds and types of faith. For despair does also create this same kind of motion in the Universe. And it also moves outward from the source thereof continually until it too returns again unto its origination.
29 Therefore, it may be said that there is good faith and there is bad faith, or in other words, there is good intention and good action which brings about much good, and there is bad intention and bad action which brings about much evil. But faith is the action which causes the Universe to apply the principles round about which it is bound
30 Now, when the movement of all things does return again unto its own source, and finds there great faith for good, the movement does combine again with that faith, which is a movement outward once again, and the good is greatly magnified.
31 And again, when the movement is caused by bad intentions and actions, that movement does also return again unto its own source. And if it finds there great faith for evil, the movement does combine even with that evil and it also is greatly magnified.
32 But behold, should evil movement flow out from the children of men and in continuing in its movement it returns again and encounters powerful movements of good, then is that evil countered in its movement. Yea, the outflowing good does so interfere with the power of the returning evil that it does counter it and cancel it.
33 Wherefore, I would call your attention to that great miracle which is made by the Zion which the Nem in this land have established. For, the rest of the world languishes in darkness and there is little of the love of God in any of the nations of the world. But so much more powerful is the good than the evil that when the two encounter each other, behold, the evil is diminished.
34 But did you think that Zion blesses only those who live in it? Zion is the pure in heart, even the very heart of the world. And the Lord does judge the intent of the heart. Shall there be good men and good women in the world but know little of the kingdom of God, yet I assure you, their good works act upon the Universe in like manner as do yours. Therefore, always remember, Nem, good does beget good. And when great faith is exercised, or in other words, when great movement for good is made upon the Universe, great shall be the good that shall be magnified unto they who exercise such faith, even unto the healing of the world.
35 Wherefore, you may know nothing of the people of the far reaches and corners of the world. What is that to you? Do good. And also, you may know much about the evil that is committed by the wicked in some place or other. Again I say unto you, What is that to you? Do good continually. For, you know not but what your goodness might even have effect upon far distant people.
36 Remember that which has been written about King Mosiah. Behold, did his sons not do wickedness in all the Land Southward? Yet, is it not so that because of the prayers of their father they were brought to a miracle? And were they not so changed that they became the greatest preachers of their people? You may believe it, for, had it not been for their preaching, it is most likely true that you might never have been placed in the happy state in which you find yourselves.
37 For behold, their preaching did create a generation of Lamanites who set aside the wickedness of their fathers. These became the Anti-Nephi-Lehies, whom we call the Children of Ammon. And did the Lord not teach them upon the Way, and instruct them in meaningful and beautiful celebrations? Yea, it is because of the preaching of the sons of Mosiah the King that the Nem have the Purification of the Ammonites and also the ordinances of the High Place. Now, do you see how the great acts and utterances of faith of one who is conscious to do good may make great effect upon the wicked? You may believe me, your good works do likewise.
38 Our purpose is not to learn to do evil. The Lord did not enter into the covenant with the Father and with the Holy Spirit of Promise so that we might become versed and expert in the practice of corruption. On the contrary, we are placed in this New and Everlasting Covenant to learn to do good continually. Behold, it is for this cause that the Lord has instructed you in the teachings, principles, laws and the ordinances of the High Place. Behold, these things do not teach but a little good. Nay, they are not a paltry attempt at marginal goodness. Rather, He has taught us an elevating law so that we might begin to act out an elevating goodness. Behold, this magnifying faith does destroy the works of darkness. Behold, the exercise of this faith shall bring about the restoration of all things.
39 I tell you these things that your minds may not be troubled because I said that the Nem shall dwindle and barely shall any rightly be able to say in the last days, ere the Lord does raise up again the Remnant of the House of Israel again in this land, that Zion is found anywhere. But behold, content yourselves with this foreknowledge, that from among your descendents, Zion shall once again be established. And behold, before the Lord does come again in His great glory, there shall surely be a righteous people to greet Him in this blessed land.
40 And He shall use your doings to inspire your descendents to take up His ways once again and to raise up a standard to all the world. Behold, they shall look to and fro for an ensample to use as their model, but there shall be none in the world. For the shepherds of the church shall teach that Zion is a thing other than that which you have been taught. Wherefore, they shall not be an ensample unto your descendents. But your words out of the dust shall exhort them where the voices of their shepherds shall turn to silence.
41 And the nations of the world will all be built upon the policy of getting gain and their wise men shall extol this policy as virtuous. They shall not be an ensample unto your descendents and their counsel shall be as unprofitable to their purpose as that of the shepherds of the church. But the wisdom of the Nem shall be their schoolmaster.
42 And the Lord shall bring your writings and your rememberings unto your children in latter days and this shall be the ensample for them. Yea, they shall take of your daily walk and daily talk and make of it an ensample of their own. And they shall begin once again to teach the pure and simple precepts of the High Place. This shall be the beginning of the Zion they shall establish in the land.
43 And behold, this shall be a sign unto they who the Lord shall call up out of your dust to bring again Zion, that the day has come to accept of Him that stewardship which He shall take from the Gentiles and return again unto the Children of Israel left in the land. 
44 The Lord shall have brought the Gentiles into this land and He shall have begun a great work among them, even a commencement of a great restoration. But they shall have rejected the greater portion of the fullness of the gospel which He shall have revealed unto them through His servant the prophet.
45 And behold, almost immediately upon their foundation, they shall have set aside the Zion of the Lord and taken up and embraced the Babylon of the world. Yea, they shall sin against the gospel and return altogether back unto all their golden calves and their idolatry. Yet shall they think they are the chosen and elect and they shall boast of it before all the nations. But their boasts shall be vanity.
46 For their shepherds shall cease to teach them that they should seek to stand personally in the presence of their Lord while yet in the flesh. Yea, they shall entirely misconstrue the teachings of the Temple and they shall teach that the ordinances bring salvation.
47 Behold, it is not the ordinances of salvation that bring salvation, for that is the office of the Lord through the Holy Ghost. Rather, the ordinances of salvation are those ceremonies and celebrations that teach salvation. But the shepherds of the church shall teach that salvation comes by and only through the performance of ordinances and that the ordinances may only be performed by the shepherds of the church. Wherefore, they shall teach that they are the ministers of salvation and they shall wear that doctrine upon their sleeves.
48 But this is not all, they shall insist that the ordinances are locked up with keys and that only the shepherds possess or may possess the keys to their performance. And they shall lock up the minds and the hearts of the people as a storehouse and they shall put the keys thereof into their pockets. For the people, because of the teachings of the shepherds, shall universally believe that they have no access to heaven because of the keys. And they are as if locked in a cell and must depend upon the shepherds for ordinances to save them. Yea, the shepherds of the church shall make of themselves masters, and they shall esteem all men as servants unto them.
49 And this shall be extolled as great wisdom and sound doctrine. Yea, this shall the people call restoration and the fullness of all things. Yea, this shall they call the fullness of the gospel and it is the ensign that they shall raise up in the last days unto all the world.
50 And the Gentiles shall pursue and drive the Remnant of Israel left in the land. And behold, they shall trample them under their feet. Their nations shall be utterly and completely undone, for they shall be subdued by the Gentiles. And the Gentiles shall set them in desolate places as their prisoners and the spoil. They shall not be allowed even so much as to pray or call upon the name of their Lord in their own language. So great shall be the oppression of the Gentiles and so heavy the yoke that they shall press upon your descendents.
51 But, when the Gentiles shall esteem that they have purged them enough so that they shall have been washed clean of all their traditions, or so they suppose, they shall lift the yolk somewhat from off them and they shall give them more liberty. The Gentiles shall set up governments within their midst in order that they might continue to control them, but the people shall once again begin to enjoy freedom to move about upon the land.
52 And the land shall call up to them as a familiar spirit and they shall feel pullings from their grandfathers. Yea, though their blood shall be mingled with the Gentiles, they shall begin to feel an urge and a great need to return again to the ways of their fathers, even Israel. But, being at liberty to move about, they shall have melted into the midst of the Gentiles and they shall no longer be in bondage. Wherefore, they shall quietly begin again to restore the things that were lost because of the Gentiles.
53 And behold, they shall do this partly by diligent study. But much of this restoration shall come directly from the Spirit through that faculty of the Holy Ghost that does bring all things to their remembrance. And behold, when the time is right and every needful thing is prepared, the Lord shall bring some few of them once again upon the Way and there reveal to them the records which you have dedicated unto them.
54 Then shall the restoration of all things begin again to break forth upon this land. For the Children of Lehi shall not set the teachings of these records aside as a thing of naught, as the Gentiles shall have done with that which the Lord shall have revealed unto them when He commenced the restoration among them. But the Children of Lehi, who shall be left in the land, shall take up your records and they shall use them quietly to bring again Zion.
55 And they shall build, little by little, settlements and villages created in the image of Nespelem and Elak Kowa and Potal, yea, and all the cities of the Nem. And how shall they do this? Is your writing so detailed that they might build up duplications of your cities? I say unto you, Nay. But that which you record shall be enough for them to learn Zion in their hearts. Then shall any place they build be equal to all that you have built. 
56 For it is Zion in their hearts that shall govern all that they build. Wherefore, can their little villages become ought else than Zion? Or can their great cities become Babylon if they have built Zion in their hearts? It is not possible.
57 But behold, they shall be persecuted for this great work. Yea, the shepherds of the church shall not support them but they will rail against them and condemn them for their desire to do that which they have deemed unprofitable.
58 But the profit shall be unto the Remnant. For, when the Gentiles shall have pushed the earth to the point of collapse, they shall be reduced to the rabble mob and all that shall have been deemed profitable to the Gentiles shall become their prey. Then shall the shepherds of the church regret the heel that they lifted before the Remnant. Then shall they regret the wagging head.
59 For Zion shall possess none of that which the mob shall esteem and they shall pass them by. But the shepherds of the church shall have taught the getting of gain and the laying up of riches. Yea, this shall be taught as doctrine and the church shall swell with it. Then shall the church become the prey of the wicked and the mindless, because of its riches.
60 Yea, this shall be a sign unto your descendents: The sun shall burn the stalk and many will leave the places of their inheritance because of the change in the seasons. And they shall flood into the cities of the Gentiles to find refuge. But the cities shall have no means to support them and will need to rely more and more upon a very few to produce provender for the throng. And great portions of the nation shall lay empty because the Gentiles shall have used up the good of the earth, to the end that, their collapse as a nation shall be as the collapse which you have witnessed in the Land of Hagoth. And even you have seen such a collapse in your own time in the Valley of Meninta. 
61 When all this shall repeat again in this land, the Lord shall bring out of darkness your records and your writings, and behold, the Remnant will take them up and shall use them as their standard. And they shall remove themselves from the rabble and set themselves alone in the wilderness. And they shall build up Zion in their hearts and establish Zion in the land. And all the world shall carry on around them devouring the good of that upon which they rely. Then shall Babylon fall and the Gentiles shall be left with their heaps of gold, but all their gold shall have no value over a loaf or a fish.
62 Yea, then shall the Gentiles remember that their prophets did prophesy of these very things, but their remembrance shall avail them nothing. Yea, they shall cite the scriptures and their writings, that their prophets warned them and they shall wonder how they might have been so deceived when the truth and the warning were given so plainly. But they shall not have Zion in their hearts. Wherefore, they shall wonder at their folly and not understand it.
63 But because of your records, Nem, the Remnant shall establish themselves in the waste places and they shall have nothing which the world esteems as worthy. But they shall also not be brought to collapse with the rest of the world, for their riches shall not be in the stuff of the world but in that which is truly of value unto the Lord. And their reliance shall not be upon the world, but they shall each produce according to their needs and yet a little more to provide for the beggar. And this shall set them in good stead in comparison to the Gentiles who shall run to and fro with their wealth in their hands and shall not be able to buy a morsel with it.
64 And because the Remnant shall not think themselves the masters of the earth, they shall tend her and take good care of her and she shall give abundantly. Yea, because the Remnant shall love the earth and esteem her above all riches, she shall reward them with abundance. And because they do not seek to use her up to get the gain thereof, they shall prosper and shall not want for anything.
65 Yea, there shall come a day when the Gentiles, who should have been the servants of the Lord and bring about a great restoration, shall cook the leather of their own shoes for food; the Remnant shall not be tormented with hunger because they esteem themselves to be part of the world and not the master of it.
66 For there is but one master and that is the Lord, the Peacemaker. And it is because that the Lord has given priesthood unto the children of men that they feel that they too are the earth’s masters. But do you not remember that, in giving man dominion over the earth, He also did command him to tend it and take good care of it? He did not make man the god of this earth. There is only one who makes that claim boldly in the face of men, and he is the adversary.
67 But men do claim to be sovereign in the stead of the Lord and in this they do justify much evil. See how that in times past, when your ancestors still dwelt in the Land Southward that the Nephites allowed not the Children of Ammon to join with them in their temple worship because of their differences. And this was done because of their belief that they were white and delightsome, and because of the pre-eminent priesthood. 
68 But neither the Lord nor His prophet made such distinction between the believers. Behold, He did inspire the prophet and give Him revelation, and the Ammonites were instructed of the Lord to make the covenants of the Temple in their own way. Wherefore, have the High Place today, and it is the center of the home.
69 But look at the state of things for the Nephites. Behold, there are but three left in all the land and they are left only because of the divine intervention that has affected a translation of our bodies. Yea, the Nephites are extinguished; for all that they saw their white skin as superior to their neighbors. Yea, they thought that the color of their skin was that which determined their worthiness. Behold, their white skin was no delight unto them when they went into oblivion because of the wickedness in their hearts.
70 Yea, the children of men do often justify their evils by use of the words of the Lord or of His prophets. The color of skin is no determinant and neither is the priesthood which God does give from time to time in order that His work and His purposes might be accomplished. Behold, how that Tucantor, although he possessed the priesthood of God and was raised unto the seat of high priest before the people of Mentina, nevertheless, he did divide the people and cause the destruction of that part of the nation. Was the priesthood a determinant of his worthiness? I say unto you, Nay.
71 And I say unto you, In the latter days, the Lord shall begin again a restoration through the Gentiles. And He shall choose the Gentiles because of that quality of their character that causes them to take up and pursue a project with great vigor. Yea, He shall use this quality to send His word which He gave unto the Nephites into all the world. And behold, they shall do this thing and it shall be accomplished in them according to the word and will of the Lord.
72 And He shall give them priesthood and His authority to do many things in His name. And the keys to this priesthood He shall devolve upon them. But they shall consider this the keys to the very kingdom of God and they shall teach that without these keys no door may be unlocked and no shackle may be loosed. And in but one generation from the commencement of that great restoration, they shall have corrupted the word of God and His will, and shall bind all men with that measure of priesthood they have been given. Yea, they shall make the performance of ordinances that which does assure salvation and they shall devolve their performances upon they who possess the priesthood.
73 Behold, this shall cause a great bondage to come upon the people and, when the time comes for them to receive greater truth and knowledge from the Lord, there shall be few who can walk upon the Way. Yea, when He desires a revelation to be given, behold, He shall be required to resort to intervention in order that His work might go forward. This is not much better than the state of things before the restoration that He shall make unto the Gentiles.
74 But they shall claim to possess His priesthood and that they are the masters of the earth, having dominion over her to do with her as they will. And each man shall count his stewardship as if it were some measure of dominion over his fellow men, and this shall be the means of much tribulation in the church. And behold, the shepherds of the church, yea, the high priests and the priests, the elders even down to the least of their teachers, shall in one voice declare and agree that none shall come unto salvation except by and through them, for the Lord shall have chosen them over all the earth and they shall esteem themselves the Elect of God because of that little priesthood which the Lord shall have given them as an help meet and as a schooling ground.
75 And where is there greater pride than this, that man shall extol his own virtue and call himself elect in all the world? Yet, in the day whereof I speak, there shall be hunger in their country. And behold, there shall be they among them who suffer with the cold and are destitute. And they shall judge them and give unto them a little, but in the main, they shall look upon the suffering of the people and esteem themselves the more blessed because of their riches. And they shall declare in their hearts that the poor are not as blessed because of sin. Behold, this is the pride of the Saints in the latter days.
76 And behold, they shall claim to have charity, but it shall be by extortion. And they shall claim to have the love of God, but it shall be meted out sparingly and upon conditions. It shall not be freely given, but shall be doled out by practice and by policy that does grind the face of the poor and bring about a division between them and the rich. They shall have not all things in common and all things shall be dictated unto them. Yea, they shall know nothing of the Common Consent. And this shall they call righteousness. Yea, because of this they shall call themselves the very Elect of God.
77 They shall love themselves and spare themselves no luxury. And for the poor they shall dole out unto the shepherds but a little here and a little there. And the shepherds shall exercise dominion over the poor and their lives shall they dictate, exhorting them to bend their backs so that they too might rise up in stature and in wealth, that they might walk among the elect. Is this the Law of the Tithe? Is this the Law of Consecration? You and I may decry such practices, but behold, they who call themselves elect in the latter days shall believe it to be so.
78 And even they shall teach that the one may be lived without the other. And this thing is part of that wherein they do sin against the gospel. Yea, they shall reject even the fullness of the gospel. And is this not according as the Lord prophesied unto the survivors of the overturning of all things in the Land Southward, and even unto your forefathers in Mentina? I say unto you, Yea. This is the thing which He foretold.
79 For the Lord does have all things before Him. Yea, He does see the beginning from the end and there is nothing that escapes His view. Wherefore He did promise they who were left of the seed of Lehi, who were left in the land, even the Remnant of them at that time, that He would take up again that which He had given into the hands of the Gentiles as a stewardship and return it unto the Children of Lehi who would be left in the land, a Remnant unto the House of Israel.
80 Behold, these are they who among your descendents shall take up the standard of the Lord and raise up a Zion once again in the land. These are they who, reading your writings, and also being touched by the spirit of this land, shall esteem the earth once again and teach the stewardship. They shall not lift up their faces unto the heavens and declare themselves to be the elect of God, but God shall elect them. Yea, they shall take up the things they shall read in these records and apply them unto their own lives. They shall judge the widow and visit the fatherless, and they shall do it without extortion and without motive.
81 And they shall not look upon their fellowman and judge him because of his color, or his manner of speaking, his beliefs, nor his lack of riches. No, there shall be no division among them, except that they shall not allow that men should cast themselves higher than their neighbor and they shall not suffer them to do any kind of hurt one to another.
82 And they shall be the Sons and Daughters of Levi and shall offer again a sacrifice in righteousness. And their priesthood shall be the commission of God, given personally. Wherefore, the orders of priesthood which they shall possess shall be esteemed of them as schoolmasters only, and a means whereby they may do great good unto the children of men. But they shall not esteem themselves wiser, greater, or any more elect than their neighbor because of the priesthood. And the Lord shall bring them upon the Way and instruct them.


83 And the people shall come unto Christ with all the intent of their hearts and they shall rejoice with Him upon the Way. And they shall live from revelation to revelation because they have not shunned prophecy and the Gifts of the Spirit.
84 And behold, the ordinances of salvation shall once again become the ensigns that they ought to be, and they who perform them shall have truly received the commission of the Lord. Wherefore, it shall be unto them as the Lord designed, for that which qualifies one to receive the priesthood is the desire to do the will of the Lord. And behold, the priesthood shall not become a dividing line between they who have and they who have not, and the people shall not puff themselves up because they have received authority, or so they suppose. But God shall justify them in their works because of the intents of their hearts, because they are good.
85 And thus shall the Lord commence again a great restoration in this holy land and it shall go forward even unto the culmination thereof. And the Lord shall fulfill His promise that He made unto the Children of Lehi in times past, that they shall have this land as an inheritance again and the stewardship of His kingdom.
86 And all this shall be restored unto the House of Israel because they take up His laws again and teach them unto their little ones. Yea, and their concentration shall turn away from the world and they shall delight in the Lord. For they shall walk with Him and talk with Him, and what worldly wealth can compare to this? What goods may they stuff into their storehouses and what gold and silver may they lay up in store that may buy the love of God?
87 Yea, they shall build and establish Zion again because they shall not set aside that which the Lord has commanded them and they shall not misinterpret that which He commanded their fathers. For they shall have the Second Comforter and the First, and is this to be despised? I say unto you, Nay. It is the best of the blessings and gifts of God.
CHAPTER 15
1 Behold, many years have passed away since Timothy came among the Nem of the Mountains in the days of my stewardship, and he has come back on many occasions since then. And the teaching of Timothy is a thing of great import unto us as a people. Wherefore, we do esteem his words to be great. And they are always in unison and they always have to do with the four great laws of the High Place.
2 And in that time, many new settlements and villages of the Nem have been formed, and also many cities and villages are no more. For, the Nem of the Plains and of the Lakes do find great reason to flee before the encroaching snows. Yea, the snows in the far north do come earlier and stay longer than in times past and the people of Corianton, although some few prefer to live upon the snow and ice the year round, most have all left that part of the country and have moved further south. And so it is in the Plains and also along the Coasts of the West Sea.
3 Yea, the ice does form earlier in the fall and stay longer and does not altogether break up in the spring as it was wont to do. Yea, and in the further north, there is no time for the crops to mature. Wherefore, we have had call to send the greater portion of our surplus great distances in order that relief might be given those Nem who have not been able to relocate quickly.
4 And behold, new lands have been exposed in the south, yea, even that great gulf in the south parts of the Land Northward have been exposed and are become dry land. Wherefore, there are now many settlements of Lamanites in that country and many Gadianton Robbers.
5 Yea, the face of the land does begin to change greatly in the Land Northward because of the cold in the north and because of the great heat in the south. But in the region we know as Nespelem, these changes have brought greater prosperity because we find ourselves in the middle. Behold, our winters have more snow, but they are shorter than in my father’s time. And our summers are somewhat hotter, but the duration of the hot season is also not so long. And the spring and the fall are longer and more pleasant, wherefore, our season of growth has improved somewhat.
6 And there have been reports of wars in the regions to the south round about the Land of Hagoth, or in other words, in that region where our father, Hagoth, first made his settlements. And in the cities of that region there is much unrest, for they are divided and have not all things in common.
7 And further, we do not hear as often from the peoples of other regions. Yea, our messengers are fewer and we are not as informed about the world as we have been in the past. I esteem the reason for this is due to the greater effort our people must employ in order to grow provender to send to those of our people who are still not removed from out of the far north country. And this occupies our minds exceedingly. But also there have been fewer travelers from other countries, and most especially this applies to visitors from across the West Sea.
8 Yea, and it is passing ten years since any messenger has come over the sea from the Nem of the Islands and we worry greatly what might be the cause of this great silence.
9 Now I, Shioni Akek, finish this my record. And I do hope that some good may come of the things which I have written. Yea, I do hope that they from among my own posterity who do read my words may find benefit in them.
10 Behold, Timothy has prophesied that a great restoration must come from out of our descendents, and this fills us with joy. But the knowledge of it also teaches us that there must first come about the reason for such a great restoration. This does cause us to turn again and review our own doing, for we do not desire that it might be any of our doing that brings upon the Nem any degree of apostasy.
11 But we are reconciled that at some point our people may turn from the path that we have chosen and because we cannot see all clearly, behold, we worry for our descendents. And we continue to teach our children carefully and to tend the earth mindfully. We do this in the hope that a falling away may not take place in our day. And behold, this is all that we can do. Amen.